25 December 1998
Christmas Puja: Become Thoughtlessly Aware
Ganapatipule (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

First, I’ll speak in English and then in Hindi.
Today, long time back, Christ was born. You all know the story of His birth. And of all the sufferings He had to go through. He’s the One who has given us a model of a Sahaja Yoga, for He didn’t live for Himself, in no way. But He lived for others, working out the Agnya chakra. You may be divine, you may be very powerful, but this world is so cruel that they don’t understand spirituality. They don’t understand the spiritual greatness. Not only that, but there are many factors which attack spirituality. They have always done it. Every saint has suffered a lot. But I think Christ has suffered the most.
As you know, He was endowed with all the powers of Shri Ganesh, as He is the reincarnation of Shri Ganesha. The first of them was His innocence. He was the eternal child we should say. That He couldn’t understand the cruelties and the hypocrisy of this stupid world. Still, if you understand what can you do about it? But with great courage He took birth in the country where people had no idea of spirituality. I have read a book about Him saying that He came to Kashmir where He met one of My forefathers – Shalivahana. It’s very interesting because it’s all in Sanskrit and the writer perhaps did not know Sanskrit, so he has given everything in Sanskrit language, which is not very congenial, I’m sure, to the Western people. Thank God he didn’t know Sanskrit, otherwise it would have been very dangerous. It’s written in that that he asked Christ, “Why have You come to India?” So He said, “This is My country, that’s why I’ve come here, where people respect spirituality.
But I live among people who do not understand spirituality at all.” His conversation with him was very, very interesting. Because Shalivahana said that “There is more reason that You should go back to Your country and teach them Nirmala Tattwam.” That’s the principle of purification. Went back, after three and a half years, He was crucified. I personally think the big difference between the Western execution and Indian is that it’s – in the West, killing is a very great profession. With the slightest pretext they kill people. Anybody who is a saint was killed or they called him a madcap. It’s the best way to avoid spirituality. While in India, if a saint says anything, then he is not challenged – never. But they believe in it. Because he is a saint, he is a much higher personality than we are.
Though there were very nasty people around and they tortured them. But as a whole the public, the people, respected them. If there are false gurus, normally they don’t stay in this country because they know they’ll be found out. Also they are so money-oriented that they go to America or to some foreign countries and settle down there to make money. This is one of the signs one should see. This may be one of the reasons why Christ was born in a very, very ordinary family. He had no proper bed to sleep as a child also. It’s all described, where He slept, how His mother and father lived in a place where there were cows and calves. It was to show that spirituality doesn’t need any luxury, doesn’t need any pomp and show. It is a power within.
It is a glow and the light within which shows, automatically. You don’t have to do anything to show it off. Such a person doesn’t have any sense of money and other things as possessions. He was bothered about people who were suffering physically, even the lepers, and He tried to cure them, He tried to help so many people who were sick physically, because at that time, there were no hospitals, no doctors. So His attention was drawn to people who were suffering physically. Also mentally He tried to prepare them. There are so many beautiful sermons on the mount. In a way that time, people were not so materialistic, so they listened to Him – you can’t say how many understood Him. It’s very important that if you are not a realized soul, then it’s difficult to understand spirituality. The one who is talking about spirituality and the one who is listening to it, both of them have to have minimum of realization.
So from His beautiful life that I’ve seen, we have to learn that unless and until we are realized soul, we will be torturing the spirit of Christ. We have seen it’s happening, all those who talk of Christ. He has said it very clearly, “You’ll be calling Me, ‘Christ, Christ,’ I won’t recognize you.” Very clearly He has said it. I don’t know why they didn’t remove it from the Bible. It means those who will talk and preach and dress up to show off that they are spiritual in the name of Christ, He will not recognize them. It’s as simple as that. And this time now when it’s the Last Judgment, He is going to judge the whole world on the basis of spirituality, which means vibrations. His judgment has already started. I’ve seen it. You can see in so many countries things are just disappearing.
All their ego, all their aggressiveness, all their cruelties are being challenged. And those who did wrong in the war also are taken to task. So in the history also, those who have done wrong to any community, to any people, they all will be taken to task. They had no business to be aggressive on people and to torture them. This is what is Shri Ganesha’s principle acting through Sahaja Yoga. Christ didn’t say that, but He did say, “There will be Last Judgment.” On one side He was very kind and compassionate, on the other side He was really Shri Ganesha, because He took a hunter to hit the people who were selling things in the temple. You cannot have business in the name of religion. What a big thing it is to understand. But the Christians didn’t follow that, they did not. I don’t know where have they gone.
As we have Mahatma Gandhi who talked of spirituality and nothing else, adhyatma all the time. But his successors who came put him somewhere with his spirituality and started a new world, new ideas and a new style of life. Those who are supposed to be His followers are now wanting to have many pubs, and also all kinds of things, can you imagine? This Congress was started by Mahatma Gandhi, and the Congress wallahs are doing all this. Where are they going to lead? The beauty of this country is, the treasure of this country is spirituality. Instead of taking to spirituality, where are they going? They may not be Christians, but they respect Christ, they respect Bible. I must tell you, is a fact, people don’t know. They are not Christians means in the sense they are not baptized, but they respect because they understand that there was so much of spirituality about Christ.
He was the personification of spirituality. That’s the beauty of Indians: if somebody is a Hindu or a Muslim, makes no difference. There were many Muslims who were saints and Sufis in India, they are all respected by everyone whether they are Muslims or Hindus. So for Christ, nobody has any objection at all. On the contrary, you saw yesterday how they were all happy about it because they are realized souls. But even if they are not, in this country Christ is very much respected. They can’t understand, how can they scrutinize the life of Christ? How can they judge Him? And how can they make vulgar films about Him? This they can’t bear it, because the respect that they have for spirituality exists very much more than it exists outside.
Because in the name of Christ people have done such a lot of wrong, such a lot of killing has been done. All kinds of wrong things have been accepted. With all this, one doesn’t understand how they have judged Christ. For example, what I know in England, I saw, I was shocked that if somebody dies, they drink. If somebody is born, they drink. Drinking is the only way they have relationships. “How can you drink?” I asked them. They said, “Why? Christ created wine.” I said, “When?” “In a wedding.”
I said, “In a wedding? That was not wine, that was just the juice of the grapes that they grew there.” We call it drakshas in our language. How can that be wine? It has to be first fermented, it has to be rotten, how can that be? So this is biggest dharma – to drink. But in India we know, though nobody has said anything against drinking, but we know drinking is a sinful thing. You see it everyday, everybody knows that if you drink you become absolutely out of your mind. There’s nothing to be said on a religious platform, but everybody knows that what is drinking is. Not that people abroad don’t know, they also know.
But somehow it has become a fashion. Even in our country it has now been introduced, I don’t know how after Independence, people have started drinking. Every party they drink, also in the name of Christ on Christmas day. It’s such a insult to His beautiful holy life. So, when They came on this earth, perhaps all Their powers of holiness were destroyed. The very good thing about Indians is that at least they respect, they respect a holy place. That is something good about them. And they know what is holiness is. Now of course they are becoming very modern and Americanized. But still, they know what is wrong, what should not be done.
With Sahaja Yoga now I am very happy to say that the foreign Sahaja Yogis also have become very beautiful. I’m surprised, because in their culture there is no spirituality. But I don’t know how they left all that nonsense and have come out like lotuses, beautifully, with such beautiful fragrance of spirituality. This is something – a miracle. Everybody says, “Mother, we can’t believe it, how could have happened ? How did You manage this?” I would say it’s the blessing of Christ. They saw how people are working out in the name of Christ in a very degraded manner, and they developed a kind of a awareness that definitely something wrong with this, this is not Christ. This is not His holy life they are depicting. It’s something else. And that is how I think in the West there’s a greater urge, greater ascending force.
Yesterday somebody came and told Me, “Mother, there is no collective meditation.” I was very happy to hear that. What is most important is meditation in Sahaja Yoga, no doubt about it. But the foreigners do meditation much more than Indians do,very surprising. And foreign men and women are very highly equipped I must say, as far as spirituality is concerned. Especially Russians, I was surprised that in America, they told Me, “Mother, these Americans are not Sahaja Yogis.” I said, “Why?” “They don’t have that respect for You, they don’t meditate. Those who do not meditate are not Sahaja Yogis.” I said. “I agree.” And they make all of them, all the Americans to meditate. I don’t know why in these Eastern Bloc people, Bulgarians and Russians and all these Romanians, how they have taken to Sahaja Yoga so much. Of course, they had the curse of communism on them.
Maybe that they felt that they have missed something in life, and they went deep down into themselves, and that is how they have achieved it. But I have to tell Indians that they have to meditate. Indians have one or two very bad qualities, and that is one of them is groupism. For example, if they’re Brahmins, they’ll sit together; if they are Kayasthas, they’ll sit together; if they are Bhaniyas, they’ll sit together. If that is not so, then by another name they’ll group together. This is the worst curse of My country, because once you start grouping together you can never see the good of others and you can never see the bad of yourself. This grouping together can bring lot of problems in this country. At the time of Christ they had very different type of people. Either they were interested in spirituality, or they were not. Now we have people here who are interested in spirituality, but still they – one leg is in the water.
Where the age old problems still exist. And this is the ruin of our country. We cannot combine together, we cannot be friends with each other. Of course not in Sahaja Yoga, I must say, it has been solved very well. But if you see even at the time of Christ, He had problems with His disciples. Especially something happened with Peter. And He is the one who says a Satan will meet you. Because I think people fall into the group of satanic forces. And He said that He removed the satanic devils from many people and put them in the pigs. It’s true.
There is a satanic force which is working very strongly. The more we develop security of spirituality, the more they will develop. The satanic force is in a different form in the West and a different form in the East. But I would like to tell for them to be careful how to find out the satanic forces in the West. You may not be affected by that because you are realized souls, but you’ll have to fight it. You will have to fight it, for example racialism. Racialism is still very powerful there, very, very powerful. And you have to fight racialism through marrying people who belong to other races. But still I find difficult to marry a black person to a white person – is an impossible situation. If I try that I don’t know what happens.
Once we had such a marriage, I must tell you. And a white lady, French lady, was married to a black man. Instead of the French lady dominating, this black man dominated. So I was quite surprised, you know, how could that be? So, the reason was, I think he was taking the revenge maybe, the respite. So first of all, tremendous love and affection has to grow between the people. This color is so skin deep. It has nothing to do with the love inside, nothing. It’s so skin deep. Thank God in our country, you can have a wife who will be very dark, husband will be very fair or the vice-versa.
But they never look at that from that angle. I don’t think that exists in this country. But we have another kind, you see, just is a typical human problem is that he discriminates. Through ego, which I must say, Christ has tried to fight your ego. He was born in a very humble family and He was not a white-skinned man, no. In your language He was brown, but in Indian language He was black. But, when it comes to spirituality, you just see the enlightened one. You don’t see what color they have of the skin. It’s very, very superficial. But this is one of the enemies of the Western life, I think, which must be conquered Materialism is another one.
But the worst of all which is against Christ is immorality. Immorality is so much accepted in the West. All kinds of immoral behavior is accepted. Like, they say that all these immoral people say, vote for somebody, he becomes a president of America. Then it’s all right, doesn’t matter, all kinds of immorality is allowed. But that is absolutely against Christ, absolutely. People don’t understand that immorality will lead them to a kingdom which I don’t know what to call because it’s even worse than animal kingdom. And they are so immoral, they listen to people like Freud, as if they have no brains, they have no spirit, to take note of such a man. Only after Sahaja Yoga, model of Christ’s life you can have. Whatever is past is over and finished.
Today now you are realized souls and morality is your strength. Forget about the past, and I’m sure you can get many more people under the banner of Sahaja Yoga if you lead a very, very moral life. At the same time, another very bad enemy we have is our anger. So they are very proud, they will say, “I’ll now get angry. You know, I’m very angry.” They are not ashamed about it and they go on saying that “I’m very angry,” as if it’s not wrong to say, “I’m very angry.” Now they say, “I hate you.” I mean, imagine any Indian language, if they use this word it would be meaning “I’m committing sin.” So all this aggressiveness comes from anger. If somebody has to be angry, he should be angry with himself. Best is, to get rid of anger, you can pull your hair, you can bite yourself, you can use your pillow to hit yourself. That may be the best way of taking out your anger.
But see for what are you angry? Sometimes it’s absolutely useless. Sometimes it has no meaning. Sometimes it’s absolutely maddening, stupid. But as long as you stop saying, “I’m very angry,” that’s it. That’s the time you should know you are falling down completely. So Christ didn’t talk of all the subtle things, I have been talking to you, because that was left to Me. Without realization, how can you talk about subtler things? You cannot. Last time I told you about the vibrations, what is it, what does it stand for and how you get the subtle energy which we call as tanmatra, of our light – tejas, of water – jala, and prithvi, agni.
But, I didn’t tell you of one very special one which is, in English language you call it ether. But ether is the energy which is managed by another tanmatra, we call it akash. It’s specially today, because it’s Christ who has sacrificed His life to open our Agnya Chakra, that we have reached that state of akash. Without Him it would not have been possible. We can have general communication. Like we can talk to people, we can say things, we can also use our fingers to express ourselves, our hands to communicate. But, to communicate vibrations, you have to have vibrations. Otherwise you cannot feel another person. But if you are at the Agnya level, means you are mental, absolutely mental, then your vibrations also are dwindling, in the sense you don’t know what really they are saying. You can’t judge your vibrations, because these vibrations are mental.
They’ll say, “Mother, we asked the vibrations.” I said, “Really?” If you don’t have any vibrations, how can you ask the vibrations? It’s very common thing. “We ask the vibration; we found from the vibrations.” It’s not possible because you are just mental. Now what Christ has done is to put you away from the mental level. That is the most difficult. While I’m surprised, those who follow Christianity have the worst mental position. They are mentally absolutely there, like, I don’t know what to call, like the fog of Delhi that you can’t cross. That’s what was broken was Christ. How much we should be obliged to Him, that He removed the greatest hurdle in the human ascent, and that one was to break this Agnya, this mental being within us.
We read like mad, we listen to people like mad, we like those who give us feed for our mental being. They’re so mental, so argumentative, think no end of their intelligence, that you have to just say, “All right, namaskar.” You can’t fight their mental attitude. That’s why Christ is to be worshipped by people who are so very mental. And this mental nonsense has given such a sense of superiority to people. “Oh, whatever we do, what’s wrong? What’s wrong?” They cannot correct themselves because unless and until you cross this limit of mental being, you cannot see yourself. You cannot introspect . You cannot see yourself. You’ll see others, “These Sahaja Yogis are like this, Sahaja Yoga is like that,” all kinds of things. But you can’t see yourself, because the whole thing is mental.
This mental attitude should be completely curbed through the help of our Lord Jesus Christ. But He’s also mental, in your brains Christ is also mental, now what to do? The One who broke the mental attitude is also a mental – you have made Him into mental, like a statue of stone. So, firstly we have to tell ourselves, “Now don’t think, don’t think, don’t think, don’t think.” Four times, and then you can rise above. And this is very important. In meditation you have to go beyond the mind. And thanks to Christ that He’s sitting at the Agnya to finish off this nonsense of mental being. I think people should stop reading also perhaps, maybe. Even My lecture becomes mental, what to do? I mean everything goes into their head becomes mental, somehow.
And then they ask Me questions, “Mother, did You say it this way, what did You -” I said, “I said it to make you thoughtless. Just to stun you, I didn’t say this to sit down and analyze and do, no, no. I said this that you become absolutely shocked and stunned.” So the best thing for all of you is to become thoughtless. That’s the blessing of Christ, that’s what He worked it out for you. And I am sure, if you work it out that don’t pay attention to others. Don’t react, just don’t react. Everything they will see, they’ll react. What is the need? What is the use? What are you going to do with that reaction?
This reaction creates nothing but ripples of thoughts in your mind, I’ve told you hundreds of times. And now you have to become absolutely thoughtless after this puja. If that happens, I think we have achieved a lot. That’s the biggest blessing that Christ has given you, which you should really enjoy. Then only this Akash Tattwa in you will work. And how it works? Through your attention, it works with Me as you know. With My attention I work out many things. How? Just My attention has become thoughtless, just thoughtless.
It goes wherever it goes, it works. But if you put your attention for thought all the time for thinking, then it doesn’t do the work that it has supposed to do. Attention works marvelously if you are thoughtless, otherwise it doesn’t. So it has to rise from your own self. Then from others to the higher level of humanity, where you are in communication with the sky, with, we can call it as the tanmatra, or the essential, or the essence of ether. With ether you can have television, you can have telephone. It’s a miracle otherwise. But with this tanmatra, sitting down here you can do the job. It works, just attention works. I know that.
You also know very well. You don’t have to ask Me to put the attention, you just put the attention and it will work out. It’s a very important thing that you have got. I think that is the first thing – once you have, no problem. But we start manifesting from the earth element. Then from the agni element, then from the jala element, and then we come to tejas, where the face starts shining. But lastly we get this thoughtless awareness by which our attention is absolutely free to do some special work. But if you are all the time thinking, then poor this attention is so busy, you know, so very busy. You don’t have to ask Me then, “Mother, please pay attention.” You can pay attention, and you can work it out.
In this attention, you don’t feel what you’ve got, what you are standing, what you are wearing, what others are doing – no, nothing. You are one with yourself. And it’s a life full of humor. So much humor. So much of joy. So much of happiness that you don’t care for anything that normally people care for. So, as it is now Sahaja Yoga has worked in so many countries. I’m so very proud of you, very proud. And now it is also going to African countries, is a very great satisfaction for Me. And you all can do it; you all can work it out.
Only thing, become thoughtlessly aware, as the blessing of Christ. If it works, you will be absolutely enjoying yourself. So may God bless you.
The fact is that this English language has been imposed on us for the past three hundred years. I have never studied the English language. Never! Even in school there was a small book, and in the Medical College, no one taught English as a language. My father used to say, “It is such an easy language and there are so few words in it, that there is no need to study it.” And he admitted us into a Marathi medium school. And he used to advise us, “Learn Marathi and Sanskrit language”. So I did not study Sanskrit language and as for Hindi, I never ever studied Hindi language.
No question about that! Didn’t learn in school or in college Didn’t learn hindi language anywhere! But there is one good quality in Me, which I must tell you about, that whenever I speak in Hindi, I can speak only in Hindi; and when I speak Marathi I can speak only in Marathi language, and when I speak in English, I can speak only English. It is very difficult for Me to translate from one to the other. That is why I cannot mix them up. Each of these three languages is different from the others. Now no one will believe that I have not studied Hindi language. But because of My interest in reading, interest in reading good Hindi books, I learnt the Hindi language. But in the beginning My Hindi speaking had a lot of words and influence from Sanskrit. Because Maharastrians speak like that only.
They don’t know day-to-day Hindi language. When they speak Hindi more than half of the words will be Sanskrit and the rest will be Marathi. You understand? This is the condition. What I have understood from all this is, that even language comes as a gift of God. Like you have a gift in music and arts, in the same way, aptitude for languages is also a blessing. And by that, one can master many languages. But the Hindi speaking people cannot learn any other language. The reason for this is – for example the English people also, they cannot learn any other language. And even if they learn it, they will not be fluent.
The reason is that everyone can speak English, so there is no interest for them in learning any other language. Now the Hindi speaking people have this problem that they just cannot speak any other language. I will never insist that you must learn Marathi, because Marathi language is very complicated. It’s very difficult. Only Maharashtrians can understand it. And it has so much merriment and so many jokes. There is nothing indecent in that language. There is not even a bit of filth or indecency in it. It is such a profound and expressive language that for Sahaja Yoga there is no other language that is more appropriate than Marathi. Because only in Marathi a description of Kundalini was written.
Whatever has been written by saints and sages, has been written in Marathi language. And if you learn Marathi, you can learn any other language. There is no doubt in this. But Maharashtrians will not learn any other language. They are very obstinate. I asked someone, “Just read this Hindi book”. He read a little bit, and put it down. I asked him: “Why?” and he said, “It is full of rubbish! Only nonsense is written, I don’t want to read it!” Because Marathi is such a clean language with such pure thoughts, that after reading… After reading Gita, you cannot read wayside books of dirt and filth. You will not understand them!
So if some of you start learning Marathi, it will be a good thing. But it is a very difficult language to master There are a lot of synonyms in Marathi language. The reason I am telling you this today is that even after coming to Maharashtra I have to speak in Hindi, because you do not understand Marathi. In Pune I speak in Marathi only. But in Mumbai I have to speak in Hindi. So those who like to learn languages, should learn Marathi. It is a language to learn. And it is such a wonderful language that our Namdeva who was a saint, a very big, a very great saint, was called by Guru Nanak and told to learn Punjabi language and write his poetry in Punjabi. And Namdevji wrote such a thick book, in Punjabi language. I too was able to speak in Punjabi when I lived in Punjab.
If you can learn Marathi, then, except Tamil language, you can learn any other language. Maybe you will be able to learn a few Tamil words It’s such a situation, that in this country there are fourteen official languages – we have, you will be surprised, fourteen official languages in this country. So I will say this that if you learn Marathi, you will manage to learn at least 8-9 of these fourteen languages. Now one more thing which is wonderful! The Bible has been translated, directly from Hebrew language directly in purity, in Marathi language. In this area, there was a lady called Rama Devi, very intelligent and noble. All the writings in the Bible, she made a translation of them – of all the Bible writings – and she did it in Marathi language. In that she has used Marathi names, like for John she has used the name Yohan, and for Matthews she has used Matthai. So the Bible that I have read was in Marathi, and that is why, many times there is confusion. She has written everything very clearly and distinctly and she has written it in all its purity.
And she has written in it that when Christ went to a wedding He transformed water into the juice of grapes. This is a fundamental point that she has written in Marathi. The second amazing thing is that about the childhood of Christ and about boyhood of Christ I have not read any poem in English language. I don’t know, have you ever heard a poetry piece about the description of Christ’s childhood? I have never heard one. But in Marathi we have many. Now, just yesterday they sang beautifully, “Baala vadana tava baghuni Krista”. After seeing your small child’s face – after seeing your face, your child like face – “Baal Vadana” – all my fears run away. So all this part is missing in the Western languages. I think that the childhood themes are not there.
We have about Krishna, about Rama, when they were children, how they used to walk, how they used to talk, how they used to put their finger in the mouth. Every little, little thing is described so beautifully about children. And that is how I think, Indians cannot think of killing their children at all. I mean it’s an impossible situation. Even in Hindi language, in Marathi language, we have such beautiful descriptions of these incarnations as children. Then the third thing, which is surprising, is that all their romance is before the marriage. After marriage there is no romance left! Third thing is that there is no romance described after marriage. All before marriage. It is the other way around in Indian languages: all the romance comes when you are married – – very sweet, sweet things.
I was surprised – I asked somebody to find out one English book where they have described the romance of the married couple. None! Finished! All the romance is over. Once you are married it is finished. Then what do you do? You quarrel, you fight, you go to the courts, take a divorce. That description is not there. And this is the significant thing that on us (Indians) there is a very big blessing of our Indian culture, very big! Please, remove that.
Someone can come and remove it. So I have read the translation of the Bible in Marathi. And whatever is written there, has great depth. I feel that English language has changed its essential nature. And even with regard to Christ, His sacred identity and spiritual significance has been preserved in the Marathi Bible. This is not there in the Hindi translation, nor is it there in the English version. The third thing is that the Maharashtrians have high self esteem. In Rajasthan also, the people from Mewar are very self esteemed. They would not learn anything from the British. If the English tried to teach them they would say, “Leave it.
No need. We have seen many like you”. But in the North of India I have seen that they are greatly impressed by the English. Wearing good suits, wearing ties, boots, commanding and ordering others. It’s not so in Maharashtra. To get a Maharashtrian wear a suit is the most difficult thing! They wear dhotis. Even educated people wear only dhotis. You can see that Tilak, who was such a great leader in the country, or we had Ranade (great leader) or Agarkar(great leader), all of them – no one wore suits and boots. No one used to wear tie or anything.
Of course, if they are in government jobs, that is a different matter. But here, even to be employed in a government job was considered below ones’ dignity and status. In Maharashtra, you must be knowing, that many times it has been written, it has been written many times, “Why don’t you take a government job?”. And they would mention three-four names of government officials as an example that they were doing well. But there is no honor and glory in a government job. Not at all! My father used to say that working for someone was inferior. Better to have your own profession. And a government job is the lowest form of employment. It destroys a person’s character.
And I’ve seen this is very true. Now, if someone gets into the IAS (Indian Administrative Service), then finished. His value goes up in the marriage market – 30 lakhs, 35 lakhs. An IAS Officer in North India is considered a big man. Here it’s not so. But here, if a man is educated, if he is a scholar, then he is appreciated; and most of all if he is spiritually sound. This is a very great difference. And that is why in the early days in Delhi, I used to wonder what will these people understand? But it is most amazing, that in Delhi, Sahaja Yoga has spread so wide; in Lucknow also. I just cannot believe!
With whose blessings has it happened? These people were so badly servile to the British. What has happened to them now? How did they get transformed? I feel that where Shri Rama and Shri Krishna, made their divine abodes, there reside their blessings. There is no other explanation. Especially Lucknow, which was a place of indulgence – eat, drink and have fun – they were all indulgent and carefree… I always hesitated as I did not know what to talk to such people. All their relationships, discussions, I just couldn’t understand. I was coming from Maharashtra and just couldn’t understand their way of life.
Making fun of daughter-in-law or making fun of sister-in-law, it never made sense to me! And now I perceive there the blessings of Shri Rama and Shri Krishna, the poetry of Kabir, the blessings of Nanak Sahib. Oh! These people of Punjab – I studied in Punjab, and I felt that in the brains of these people of Punjab, Sahaja Yoga will never enter! And now I was amazed! I am very amazed! So much bhakti and so much bliss and joy. How did they attain this? There were no big public programs there, nor did anyone give big lectures. How did all this happen?
Now in Maharashtra I really worked hard Oh my God! So many villages and hamlets I visited and worked very hard. But in Maharashtra it did not spread so much. The quality I found in North India it is not in Maharashtra. It is really surprising. I thought, all My efforts in Maharashtra will go in vain. On the contrary they got after Me! So, I discovered one thing, that there are a lot of false gurus there! So many gurus! Everyone has a personal guru; each home has a guru; It was overrun with gurus!
Even in the Panchaang (astrological calendar) even there, every guru’s name, date of birth, place etc. is recorded! Oh My God – all completely useless people. Of course there were a few genuine gurus also but very few. Very few. The others, such useless gurus, are either interested in money or interested in women! This large land of Maharashtra, such a sacred land, has been blessed by the different aspects of the Devi Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali and Adi Shakti – all of them have place in this Mahashtra. And the eight Vinayakas and Mahavinayaka, are all sitting here. One thing is that these people are not immoral, they have no dirty thoughts, but they have no capability to understand what is dharma, They don’t have the capacity. They only know going to the temples, ringing the bells and running after gurus for salvation.
They are too much ritualistic people. There is no other problem of immorality with them. But they are so steeped in ritualism that they are not able to come out of all these habits. I have given you the analysis of the situation, this way. The foreigners from whom I had no expectations whatsoever – I used to feel what kind of people are these, they have no understanding of anything – and they have reached such heights. And the people of the North whom I never thought that they would come to Sahaja Yoga… I used to call Dilli(Delhi) as Billi(cat). My marriage took place in Delhi. My father also lived in Delhi. I had no hopes from North India.
But, it is a very surprizing thing that today in Delhi and further North of Delhi, in Punjab, in U.P., all over, in Rajasthan, Sahaja Yoga has spread. But Maharashtra it is a misfortune. And because of it, your coming here is very important. Because of your chaitanya, a lot of awakening can take place here and people can feel it. By your coming here, your attention also comes to this place, and by that, in Mahashtra all the false gurus settled here – there are lots of them still… In Maharashtra there is a saying “Ucchal Bangdi Karle”. I cannot tell you the translation of this. The job of picking and throwing them out can be achieved only through your Chaitanya. Especially today, when you are worshiping the pure personality of Christ, His purest life, you are offering respect to Him, I would definitely say that, that all these so many false gurus settled here – which Christ, if He was here, He would have whipped them with a hunter – all such false gurus would be compelled to pick up their wares and run away! And after running away, I don’t know where they will go.
They have made a lot of money, and befooled many people. But there is also a kind of narrow-mindedness, a kind of foolishness in people here. Any guru comes they will prostate at his feet. There are a lot of “feet touching” devotees here! So this is one thing inside us: the capacity to get befouled! I don’t know from where it has come. Whoever comes and teaches anything, its our heritage: “Gurudev has come!”. It is due to this blind following that the spiritual culture of Maharashtra has been destroyed. And I would say that, today when you are worshipping the life of Christ, His simplicity, His purity, the weapon of His innocence, the power of Shri Ganesha, will definitely destroy these people, and in Maharashtra the spiritual awakening will take place as well. Here also the people will achieve that spiritual treasure and Param Tattwa (Divine essence) which existed in so many saints here.
There was no saint who did not mention about Kundalini. All the saints here talked about Kundalini. Saints, one greater than the other lived in this land. I think about those saints in this country, who have worked so hard here, and tried to awaken spirituality. Here, even I could not succeed. But I congratulate you for coming here. Your coming here will definitely put sense into these people. They will realise that they are just running after false gurus. I am telling you all this because many people suggested that, “Mother, instead of Ganapatiphule, You should have your program in our place”. But I said “No!
You come here!” Because it is your duty that you bring about awakening within everybody. Spiritual awakening in Maharashtra is imperative. So it is necesary for you to come here. And that too, here (Ganapatipule) – the place of Shri Jesus Christ – we honor it by our coming. He is very important here. I tell you., He will take the whip to whip all these false gurus and finish them off. But you must know that today we are here to worship and awaken His supreme divinity. And with His power, Maharashtra will become purified and holy. They do a lot of worshipping of Ganesha, they worship Ganesha a lot.
But who is Shri Ganesha, what does He stand for – all this they do not know. I don’t understand this. They are so entangled in this mess; and to release them it is necessary for you to come here. To come every year, and worship and celebrate the birthday of Christ is a great undertaking. My unending blessings to all of you.