23 May 1986
The Spirit is the light
Colegio Mayor Universitario Isabel de Espana, Madrid (Spain)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Public program day 2, Madrid, Spain, 23-05-1986
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
You have been told these three nadis within us, three channels. And also we have a booklet in which you can read about the subtle centers which are within us. But today I think I should tell you about the nature of the Spirit.
The Spirit as I told you yesterday is a reflection of God Almighty within us in our heart. And the kundalini is the reflection of the Holy Ghost in our triangular bone. Holy Ghost is the power of God Almighty. We can say it’s the desire of God and the desire of God is to create this world, the Universe, the human beings and ultimately to let them know their part.
So when the Kundalini pierces through the fontanel bone area you start getting the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost from your soft bone here then we say you have got Self-realization. But it is not yet established, it has to be established.
When the kundalini pierces this point which is the seat of God Almighty which is reflected in the heart as the Spirit, so the Spirit starts coming into our attention. So far our attention is not enlightened but as the Spirit is the light and the knowledge our attention becomes enlightened. So we become collectively conscious, a new awareness comes on our central nervous system. Now this awareness is felt onto your central nervous system. That means on your fingertips you can feel what’s wrong with yourself – because it is Self-realization, and what’s wrong with another person. Now if you know how to correct these centers then you can help the another person.
But the nature of Spirit is peace so your attention becomes peaceful. You start seeing everything as a witness, you are no more involved into the problems but you see the problems before you. Like the water when it is in waves and you are in the water you are afraid of the waves. But when you are in the boat you start seeing the water as a fun. In the same way you become a witness of the whole life. Like a drama when you are watching the drama sometimes you feel you are in the drama. But when the drama is over you realize, “No, no. I was just seeing the drama.” In the same way the drama finishes off. For you it is just outside.
So this attention which is all the time reacting to the outside influences does not react that way. It doesn’t play into the hands of outside agencies but it corrects the outside agencies which are not in balance. Your attention becomes active. The activity of the attention is so subtle and so quick, and so efficient that you are amazed.
Now this can only happen when you are a collective being. Like this finger is a part and parcel of the whole body. If there is one pain, pressure, the whole body reacts to it. So you become collective being in the sense that you become aware of being a part and parcel of the whole. And this has nothing to do with any theories or dogmas. No words, it just happens. You see for yourself that whenever your attention goes to something you can correct that problem. All the telecommunication and all the instruments that you see outside, that you have created, are inside us. And as soon as you are put to the mains they all start working and they are very, very efficient. They give you right information and act in the right manner.Now we make a computer, for example. But look at the human being, he is an ideal computer which acts so efficiently.
So the Spirit when it shines in you it surpasses over all the dogmas and all the ideas and all the false things we have put into our heads through reading because it gives us the absolute truth. It does not compromise with anything that is falsehood.
For example you want to find out, supposing, that whether a particular artist was a realized soul or not. Now what you have to do is just to put your hands towards the painting and you start getting cool breeze in your hands from the painting. Now supposing you have a friend and you want to find out how he is. You have to just put your hands towards the photograph of your friend and you can find out on your fingertips what’s wrong with him. Now if you can understand how to cure those problems sitting down here you can cure.
You take ten small children who are realized souls and tie up their eyes and tell them to feel the vibrations of a particular person. Now all the children supposing raise one finger it’s burning, this one, means that person is suffering from cold in the throat, in the center here. All of them will show the same finger, there is no difference of opinion because truth is one.
Because the Spirit is the truth that’s absoluteness, there is no compromise into it. Truth stands on its legs. We cannot organize it and we cannot command it. We cannot put it into our conceptions. It is what it is.
Like I went to America and a lady called her son who was doing very well in Honolulu, an Indian lady. And I couldn’t give the Realization to the son so she said, “Please, give him Realization.” I said, “It is not working.” So I said, “Alright. Why don’t you give? You are a realized soul.” She said, “Mother, how can I give a false certificate? It has to work out.”
But when you become the Spirit then you don’t say that, “I am giving Realization.” You speak like a third person, “This is not working. This is not coming. It is not happening.” So whatever you are doing, whatever you are working on you do it but it’s a non-action. You ego does not work there. You start speaking in third person in such a manner that you are amazed how it is working through your hands and fingers but you don’t feel that way. So you get the true knowledge. If you know a little technique how to work out this beautiful energy within you and without then you become an expert.
When Christ’s disciples got their Realization they felt the Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost and they started to talk in the language of the chakras, of the centers. And they started moving their hands as we move for our raising of our kundalini like this. And the other people thought that they were mad. But the Pentecost that was really the Sahaja Yoga.
Not the way these days the Pentecost is where people go to the left side and become possessed. Because they don’t know what’s happening to them. They are not aware as to what centers are catching, how the Kundalini is moving, at what point she is, nothing they know. They have no knowledge about the roots. And whatever they do is without any understanding. But a Sahaja Yogi exactly knows what he is doing and what problems the others have and what he has to do to correct them.
So you are completely aware. So the concept that after Realization you become a person who is [UNCLEAR] condition is absolutely wrong. Because such a person becomes dynamic, dynamic but compassionate. The vibrations are the compassion, compassion that acts, doesn’t talk. It doesn’t say, it just works. It is like a force, an energy which acts with understanding and love. Unless and until you become the Spirit you cannot feel that energy. As a human being you can never feel that All-pervading energy, you have to become the Spirit.
That is why Buddha didn’t want to talk about God. He said, “First get your Self-realization.” Same with Mahavira, both were contemporary. And they called them atheists but they were not. What they said, “First and foremost you should know the Spirit.” so you know the truth. You know the truth about everything. And when you know the truth, the absolute truth, you become courageous. You have no fear because you know the power of truth. Like Christ when Mary Magdalene was stoned – he had nothing to do with the prostitutes as such – but he went and stood before her. “Among you whosoever”, he said, “is sinless can throw a stone at me.” And this one, this working of throwing the stone never happened because of the power of his truth.
Of course, we can say that Christianity went into a lot of perversions and so the funny ideas of suffering and all that came through Paul. Paul has no business to be in the Bible. He has created such problems in Protestant people that now they are saying that Christ was a homosexual. He himself was an epileptic. He was just a supra-conscious personality and he just tried to flout Christ completely. All his divinity he brought it down to this earth. He could not believe in the Immaculate Conception. What does he understand of divinity? Who is he to be in the Bible?
We are not following Christ; we are following Paul that’s why we are suffering. This myth of suffering comes from Paul. Christ never said that you should suffer. Why would he say such a thing? God never wants you to suffer. Why really God, why will God want you to suffer? This is how Christianity got perverted. But do you know that Christians have never suffered? Non-Christians have suffered at the hands of Christians.
Thank God Columbus did not go to India otherwise I would have not been here. All America, if you go to Argentina and Chile you can’t find one Red Indian. In the name of Christ they have killed so many people even in India. They have blasted all the great temples in India and they have done all kinds of horrible things that if you see you’ll be shocked. Are they Christians? Such violence in the name of Christ. They enjoy violence in the name of Christ. Christ stood for non-violence. The whole perversion of Christianity brings bad name to him. He was an incarnation of compassion itself. He forgave the people who crucified him. How can you compare him with the people who kill a bull here or killed the people in America like that?
You have to see that human beings have to change. Our violence has to become compassion. It has to be a genuine love that we enjoy within ourselves. And what about the virtues that Christ preached? First Paul replaced Christ and now Freud. First we worship Freud more than we worship Christ.
How can we say that God will ask us to suffer? Which father will ask you to suffer? When a human father can’t do it how can the Divine Father do that? All this has gone wrong. It has gone wrong in every religion. I was myself born in the Christian religion but I find the same in Islam, I find the same in Jews, I find the same in Hindus. The main object of religion is to be cruel, to be troublesome to others. Nobody talks of love to others. Nowhere you find people have that peaceful loving temperament.
But just a wee bit, just you have to go about three feet up and you are there. Just you have to cross these chakras and pierce through your fontanel bone area and you are there. You are completely transformed. You become beautiful. You become glorious. You become righteous. You become compassionate and you become powerful. You are not afraid of anyone. This is the state just awaiting on your doorstep here. So why not have it?
And so you get what we call the joy. Joy is an absolute quality, it’s not a duality, like happiness and unhappiness. When your ego is pampered you feel happy, when it is not pampered then you’re hurt then you suffer and you feel unhappy. But joy is a state where you become a witness – you are neither happy nor unhappy – in a perfect joyous state. And you just laugh at everything that is stupid. And you don’t get disturbed by somebody who tries to intimidate you. You stand in your own glorious spirituality. And the time has come. Forget the past. This moment you can get it. So why not have it?
This is the nature of your Spirit which you have to get. But there are so many other things that happen because the kundalini also enlightens your chakras; which you can yourself read and find out and see for yourself, within yourself, experience it yourself. Nobody has to certify for you, you have to certify yourself.
I won’t be available because I’m going back to England and this day the last lecture is here. And in this short time you can understand one cannot cover the whole subject. But all the knowledge is available. There are so many tapes which you can listen to and can enjoy. And establish your state of, first of all is thoughtless awareness and then the doubtless awareness.
You have been seeking the truth for ages, not in this lifetime. So why not have it?
May God bless you all.
Now, are there again today some questions as we had yesterday?
Shri Mataji: It’s a good question, I must say. Now the thing is we know about Adam and Eve and they would have known reality in no time. But when they were given freedom they did a wrong thing. So gradually it was to be given the freedom and brought to this level. So the whole evolutionary process had to be started – from carbon onward, one by one. These centers are the milestones of your evolution till you became human being.
Now when they became human beings they started using their ego and they went amok. Because if you have to have the full freedom you have to know how to use the freedom. But once given the freedom human beings went amok. They can’t’ bear freedom. Now we can say, I’ve been to Russia, I’ve been to China, I’ve been to communist countries. Horrible thing is they have no freedom. But good thing is there’s no inflation, there’s no quarrel, there’s no mugging, there’s no problem of that kind. Only freedom they have is to drink or to divorce, in Russia. And they divorce like anything and drink like anything. You give freedom to human beings and they go amok. Their wisdom goes off. Now if you go to America you’ll see how the people behave there, very surprising, mad.
Like nowadays in England they are having a funny thing called punk. In that they put some colour in their hair and put it straight like that, you see. Now by that their eyesight is becoming weak. Now you tell them, “Why do you do it?” They’ll ask you a question, “What’s wrong?” They are all educated rich people. The richer they become the worse they are. They can’t even bear the money. If you give them freedom they are good for nothing, if you give them money they are even worse.
God knows what happens to human beings, their brains can’t bear balance, the freedom and any power. You give them powers they become dictators. Now what to do with them? So best thing is what I thought of – first give them Realization, whatever may be the conditions. Like the light should be put in the lamp, somehow. With a little light they can see what the problem is, they can see little reality then they will start clearing themselves out. But if you tell somebody that, “You’ve got ego.” he’ll box your nose. If you tell them don’t do it they will do it definitely. There is no wisdom. That’s why.
Your question is correct, my son, I know, very good. But this is the problem. That’s why first get your Realization which is very easy, not difficult, no complications. Then you’ll see yourself and you will have power to correct yourself and you will correct it. Like if you are holding onto a snake and there is darkness, you can’t see it. If I tell you there is a snake you won’t throw it away. So put the light on, even in the little light he can see the snake and throw it away automatically.
There have been many wise men also, I am not saying. There were very wise, great saintson this Earth but they were all crucified, killed them [UNCLEAR], even poisoned. What to do? People don’t like anybody to be wise, big problem.
Shri Mataji: Very good question. When the kundalini rises she goes onto the center, we call it as Agnya chakra, you’ll see there. Now that is the center of Christ. Now when the kundalini goes she awakens Christ within us. Now this center is placed between pituitary and the pineal body on the optic chiasm and it sucks in, Christ sucks in your ego and your conditionings – your superego, sucks it. And so this portion becomes soft and that’s how the kundalini can go through. Alright?
Now, I would request you to take out your shoes to touch the Mother Earth. Now please take out your shoes and put your feet parallel to each other. Now one thing is, like I’ve requested you yesterday, you have to forgive yourself. Whatever I might have said in the lecture, forget it. You have to know that you are the temple of God. Because the light has not come that’s why there is darkness. But you are glorious so you have to be pleasantly placed towards yourself. Please forgive yourself. And before starting meditation you have to say, “Mother, I am not at all guilty of anything.”
To say that, “I am guilty.” is anti-Christ actually, anti-God. Because God is the ocean of love and is the ocean of compassion. He is the ocean of forgiveness. When Christ could forgive the people who have crucified him why will he not forgive us? So just say, “Mother, I am not guilty at all. Not guilty at all of anything.” You have to be in a happy mood because we are going to enter into the Kingdom of God.
Now with this I have to tell you that the left side is the power of desire, the right side is the power of action. So you have to use the left hand like this indicating, symbolizing that you are desiring to have your Realization. But be comfortable, keep it on your lap just like this. Now with the right hand you have to do the action. I want to do this because then when I am not here you can use the same action to raise your kundalini. We will be acting on the left hand side of the centers.
First we have to put our right hand on the heart where resides the Spirit. I’m just now telling you, you can see it clearly and then we will have to close our eyes and do it. Secondly, you have to put your right hand on the upper part of your abdomen on the left hand side and press it hard. This is the center of your mastery. Now below here you go down, so take your right hand to the lower part of your abdomen on the left hand side and press it hard. This is the center of your pure knowledge. Pure knowledge, true knowledge of the technique that is Divine. Then you again go back in the upper part of the abdomen on the left hand side. Then you go back on your heart. Now here you have to raise your right hand on the corner of your neck and your shoulder and place your head on the right hand side so you can place it higher on the backbone. The hand should not be taken from this side, should be taken from this. This is the center catching when we feel guilty. Now then you put your right hand …. Left hand like this, with the feet at parallel, you put your right hand on your forehead and press it on both the sides. Now you have to take the hand on the back of your head, the optic lobe, and press it hard, push your head backwards. Now you have to stretch your fingers and the center of your palm should be put on the fontanel bone area which is a soft bone in your childhood and you press hard and move the scalp seven times, stretch your fingers.
Now we start. Put your left hand towards me and both the feet on the Mother Earth. Now the right hand on the heart. You can remove your spectacles because you have to keep your eyes shut and it helps the eyesight. Now you don’t open your eyes please till I tell you.
Now putting the hand on the heart you have to ask me a very fundamental question three times, “Mother” or you can call me “Shri Mataji, am I the Spirit?” Ask three times. Put your right hand on the heart and left hands towards me in the sense that it is parallel to the ground and the palm is upwards.
Now the second question to be asked is on the upper part of the abdomen on the left hand side, it’s the center of your mastery. This means here you have to ask a question that if you are the Spirit you are the master of yourself. Now you just ask the question here, “Mother, am I my own master?” It’s better everyone to do it. Three times, “Mother, am I my own master?”
Now take down your right hand in the lower part of the abdomen on the left hand side. This is the center of pure knowledge but I cannot force on you, you are free to accept or not to accept. So you have to say, “Mother, may I have the true knowledge of the Divine.” This you have to say six times because this center has got six petals. When you say that then the kundalini will start moving. Six times.
Now raise your right hand in the upper part of the abdomen on the left hand side. Here to help the kundalini and the chakra to open say with full confidence, “Mother, I am my own master.” Say it ten times because there are ten petals.
Now raise your right hand on the heart. Now again to help to center to open out and make the kundalini rise higher here with full confidence you have to say, “Mother, I am the Spirit.” which is the truth. Say it twelve times.
Now raise your right hand in the corner of your shoulder and your neck on the left hand side and turn your head to the right side. Here you have to say with full confidence in God’s forgiveness, “Mother, I am not guilty at all.” Please say that sixteen times. Those who still feel that they are guilty to punish themselves they can say it 108 times.
Now please take your right hand on your forehead across and say, pressing it on both the sides, “Mother, I forgive everyone.” When you say you forgive or you don’t forgive both are myths. But when you say you forgive then you don’t play into wrong hands. So please say it from your heart.
Now take back your right hand on the backside of your head and push back your head, rest on it, turn your head down. Here you have to say for your own satisfaction without feeling guilty that, “Oh, Divine, if I’ve done any mistakes, please forgive me.” But don’t feel guilty.
Now you have to stretch your right hand and put the center of your palm of top of the fontanel bone area, it’s a soft bone on your head, and press the scalp and press it hard, and push it and move it seven times slowly, slowly. Here now I cannot say that you can have your Realization. You have to ask for it as you are free people so please say, “Mother, please give me Realization.” Press it hard not lightly. Press it hard, not lightly the hair. Press it hard.
Now please take down your hand and open your eyes. Now see if you are feeling any cool breeze in your hands. Like this. Please open your eyes, watch me without thinking.
Now put your left hand on top of your head and the right hand like this and see if there is a cool breeze coming out of your head here. You can bend your head a little.
Now put your left hand towards me and with the right hand please see it, it can be little further.
Now put your right hand towards me and feel it with the left hand.
Now push back both your hands towards the sky and push back your head and ask the question, “Is this the Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost?” Ask the question, “Mother, is this the All-pervading power of God’s love? Mother, is this the Brahma Shakti?”
Now take down your hands. See if you feel the cool breeze in your hands.
Feeling there? Alright, you’ll feel it.
Heat? If you are feeling the heat then you put your left hand like this for a while to ventilate. Like this, at the back. Better? Like this. You are still feeling guilty, not to feel guilty, not to feel guilty at all. That will stop your vibrations. Alright? Now cooler? Still hot. Alright. Put your left hand on your liver. It would be alright. Those who are feeling hot are because of the liver, will be alright. Better? Alright, he feels hot air. Just do like this [Shri Mataji blows on her right thumb] to let the heat go out because heat is the sign of disease. It’s some sort of trouble of the liver or something, it’s not very good to have heat in the body. Heat in the body is not a good sign. Now better? See now. Still hot. Better. Yes, true. It will become cold just have patience with yourself, a little bit.
Did you feel hot or cold? What about you? Cold.
What about you? Did you feel the cool breeze? The one who was asking for reality. That’s a good idea. You see, there is ventilation now and the heat is coming out from there and from your hands, let it get out. Within five-ten minutes it will clear out.
Can you open the door so the heat passes out?
You can feel it on each other’s heads also. And you’ll feel very relaxed. Now better. Better now. Better, improving.
He’s putting the hand on your head and you are feeling cool. Alright? See, this is what it is. And you feel very relaxed, there is no thought. We can watch me without thinking, can you?
So this is just the beginning. You have to work it out, establish yourself. When are you having your follow-on?
[Announcement in Spanish]
He’s got it, yesterday he’s got it.
Have you cooled down now? Are you cooler? Are you cooler now? What about you? Cooler now? Better now? So much better, relaxed. Good. Now enjoy yourself.
[Shri Mataji asks a Sahaja Yogi to put some water on the hands of the present].
Only thing, I want to tell you one thing that you have now got your Realization. Alright? He has got his Realization few years back. So they know all about it. Whatever they tell you please listen to them, don’t …. You see, like we enter into a university, we have to listen to the gentleman who is our professor. Alright? When you become the professor you can also teach. So whatever they say, you listen to them. Just verify it and do not argue. If you start thinking about it you’ll go down. You all can become experts. So just patiently understand for at the most four – five sittings you will be alright. Because this is a new knowledge, entered into a new realm so one has to understand with humility.
So all those who have felt the cool breeze or the hot breeze on their head or on their hands please raise your hands, both the hands. Cool or hot, doesn’t matter.
So nice to feel that. Now some of you have not felt, not to worry, all of you can feel it. It’s very simple, it will work out. But how to keep it working on you have to learn. It is very simple and a child can also understand. So you all must meet and it works in collectivity, not single-handed at home.
May God bless you all.
I hope to see you next year. By that time you’ll be all experts.
May God bless you. You have to transform Spain.