6 October 1989
8th Day of Navaratri, Talk to English Yogis on Style and Content
Butlins Grand Hotel, Margate (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Today is the eighth day of the Devi puja and, on this day, the power of Kali acts and She is the one called as Samhara Kali, meaning the one who destroys all the evil forces. So it is a very good day, that we have a puja here, in England. I am very happy about it.
My spectacles? In my purse, I think. Where is she? She’s got it?
Now, I was thinking that I should talk to the UK Sahaj Yogis, because very important.
I’ll be completing now sixteen years of my stay in UK and I have really found such love and such goodness about you people. Now next year, I will not be staying here because my husband is going to be transferred and of course and I’ll be coming back and for a month or so, I could be with you, maybe much more closer than I have been so far.
But there’s something that I think I should warn you people, because now I’m receiving lots of letters about Gavin [Brown] asking, “Why Gavin has become like that? What’s gone wrong with him?” Perhaps everybody seems to quite frightened to see these things happening and to some other Sahaj Yogis also.
Because in other countries, when the Sahaj Yogis go out of Sahaj Yoga, they don’t get after me, or they don’t get after Sahaj Yoga or Sahaj Yogis. But they think there’s something wrong with them and they feel very sorry and keep out. But why is it that Gavin has become so adamant and is becoming so much against us? And I am told he’s supplying information to some horrible organisations and things like that.
I mean I don’t know how to explain human behaviour. It’s difficult because when you have found out something so great and if you cannot value it, what happens? Why?
So, I feel that English have so many great qualities among them because at the time of crisis they are the ones who have always stood up. Because of them we could avert the war, second world war, was averted because of them. Not only that, but also they work out things at the nick of the time, whenever it is necessary. And their whole style is very quiet and they show results at the right time, that’s a fact, no doubt. One has to accept it. All these qualities are there, but I think there are certain other things which have crawled up and maybe that’s one of the reasons we have to guard against, if you have to keep to Sahaj Yoga, if you have to grow in Sahaj Yog.
So one of the things I have found out that English believe more in the style, what your style is. Say, like a cocktail style, you can call it, or a dandy style then a punk style and this style and that style. You have got tailcoat style. All sorts of styles here, they say. And because [there’s] too much of it, in the atmosphere, too much. As soon as you see a house they’ll tell you, “Oh, this is Georgian!” “This is such and such,” and “This is Neo this and that!” So, you see, it must go up to that style, it has to be that style [for them]. And any house which is not to that style, then they’ll say, “Oh, it’s a compromise!” There’s a little fussy or I don’t know what all words they use to criticise such a thing.
So this is one thing we have to know that styles cannot substitute the content. It cannot be a substitute.
Style is so outward and so deceptive. It is so deceptive and so outward that it deceives us also. Like, if we feel that we are a class, or something, there’s class consciousness also quite a lot. If we start thinking, we are [from] a [social] class. Then I mean, one has to know that this is something very man made stuff — to be a class. If you say, “I am a class.” That means it’s all man made. It’s not the way the Divine is. The Divine doesn’t have all these differentiations.
You are a class Sahaj Yogi, means in your content, within yourself, you have such powers; that you can face yourself happily and you enjoy yourself, and you know yourself. That is what is a class in Sahaj Yoga, not how you dress up or how you talk of you hold your fork and spoon — it’s not the way. So this style that we think of is no substitute for the contents.
Now this thing works out better with this outside culture that we have, that you should not express your feelings. This is another nonsense they have taught us, in this country, which is all nonsense, absolute nonsense — you should not express your feelings and you should be poised. Somebody died, a friend in our circle, and Mr. Shrivastava went there. Thank God, I had no black sari so I didn’t go! But you must go in the black sari, and black blouse and black everything and the black bangles and I said, “Baba, I don’t have all these black, black things, so what to do?” So I didn’t go.
I mean what is there? A person is dead now, he doesn’t see you whether you’re in black or red, you see? But one thing is there, definitely, that if you wear something, whatever you wear, you express the inside, the content within you, that you’re so sad and unhappy.
And then he went and there was a champagne for that! I mean, somebody is born you have a champagne somebody dies you have a champagne. So champagne has nothing to do with the style, they can have [that] at any time. But the style was, you must wear black, everything black. I said, “This is too much!” I mean at the most one could have some strip of black to suggest. But what is there to suggest, if somebody is dead?
I mean you do feel inside. And he was looking very sick, my husband was looking very sick, because he was feeling so sad really that he had lost a friend. I also cried. So they said, “What’s the matter, are you not well?” They were all laughing, joking, and the dead body was lying in the next room! So C.P. said, “No, but such a friend!” “Oh! Be poised! You have no poise, Mr Srivastava!”
And one lady had gone, whom she’s also our common friend, she’s from, I think, Ghana or some place, and she started crying, naturally! I would have also have also cried, thank God I didn’t go. So they all criticised her, “This is not proper, she should not have done all this things,” and all that.
So all these ideas, you see, every country has some sort of a conditioning and we must realise what our conditionings are. Then we are all right. Because we have to break all our conditionings in every country. The best thing about Sahaj Yogis is that once they become a Sahaj Yogi, they see the problems of their own country. This is the best thing we have. And they laugh at the people who are there.
But still we must know there might be some subtle things lying within us, because from this case of Gavin, now you can see clearly. You see, he had a style, always he had a style for everything: for puja he’ll have a style, this thing he’ll have a style, that thing he’ll have style. So I used to little bit doubt him. I said, “Why is he’s so much worried about his style?” Even if he’ll wear an Indian dress, he will think of a style, what style it is. I said, “You see, we don’t have any styles. This, we have been wearing from ages! Now what style can we have? We don’t have Georgian, this, that style at all. It’s only one style, is kurta — that’s all.” So like that, he was more worried about the style he would put up. And that’s what I am saying, that we have to understand that style cannot substitute your content. Be careful.
So now not to express your feelings, you shouldn’t laugh you should sit like a monk. We don’t want monks here, all right? You have to really laugh aloud and enjoy and show your expression of your enjoyment. If you cannot laugh it out, if you do not know how to enjoy your Spirit, you are not a Sahaj Yogi, finished! That’s all. If you are a Sahaj Yogi, then you should be able to enjoy everything, every small thing you should enjoy.
Once we climbed a hill to go to a temple to see. It was an old temple, we went to see that and we had to climb quite a lot. My son in law, my daughter, they were exhausted, but I was enjoying everything. I didn’t feel anything. I went up and then we all laid down there, in one of the outer sides of the temples. And he said, “I’m fed up of this,” my son in law said, “it’s too much to climb this.” I said, “Now watch these elephants, see these elephants are so nicely done! Everybody has a different type of a tail!” He said, “Mummy how can you see tails at this time at this time when I’m so exhausted?”
I said, “That’s how I don’t get exhausted! But you can see the tails, there are different, different types!” He said, “Just now I cannot”.
I said, “You start seeing them, you’ll forget it.” And really it happened.
So one thing is: we are not any more English, or UK Sahaj Yogis, we are Sahaj Yogis of the God’s Kingdom. And we know what is the truth. And we are not going to make ourselves miserable for nothing at all, because some of our great grandfathers have told us to put things like this, that you have not to express your feelings.
But it was not so bad I must tell you when I first came, when I gave Realisation to Douglas. If you see him, he’ll remember. You see, he lost all balance, he just picked me up and put me up like that. And I felt that English have improved a lot! But Gregoire was there, he got nervous, He said, “Put Her down! Put Her down!”
So it was so simple, so spontaneous, so natural, you know. That is what we should understand: Are we natural? Are we spontaneous? Do we laugh a lot? Do we talk in a very open way? To be open hearted is wrong according to the old stupid traditions what you must have had. It’s wrong, absolutely wrong I tell you!
So this is one of the things we must cut out that we have no other styles, but Sahaj Yoga style is to laugh, to talk to embrace everyone and to be joyous. That’s what we are. Because we know the knowledge, we are gnostics, they are not stupid blind people, who would wear their, black hats to go to church and sit over all the tombs there. We know such a lot.
So this is first thing that we have no styles, no styles of any kind.
Now some Sahaj Yogis went abroad got married, from UK and I have complaints about them, that they think they have become ladies and ladas. I said, “Eh? Ladies and ladas? They have had no jobs here, how have they become ladies? They said, “They have. Now they want to wear a kind of a hat and they want to wear this kind of a thing and some of them have become hippies!” I said, “Hippies, why? I can’t understand!” “And they don’t want to talk to anyone and they are stiff upper lip.” All English styles, you see!
I said, “I hope they are not wearing tail coats borrowed from this Moss Bros.” (laughter)
So it was very sad because they would not go to any collective programmes, they would not, because, you know, they have become now sahibs, you see! In India, they are called as sahibs. In India, if somebody tries to show too much style or tries to show that he’s some class, they say, “Ha! Now he’s become a sahib! He’s become a sahib!” Sahib means, it’s condemnation. In India it is condemnation. But that’s what it is. It’s come from English only, because English would talk like that; sometimes in such a manner that, even he might be just a butler somewhere, but he would talk with such a big airs about him. But you are not that.
And we have been thinking why, why is it, that the English cannot open their hearts? After all, you live on the heart of the whole universe! I mean, if you don’t open your hearts who else is going to open their hearts? There’s no need to be vivacious, talking like this, talking like that, it’s not needed, I am not saying that, that, please understand. But I am saying, in a proper dignified manner, you have to laugh, you have to joke, you have to enjoy.
Because there’s no joy inside that’s why it is so. Is it not? Or is there joy? And still you think, “If I laugh too much, what will people say?”
So, this is one thing one has to understand: that all these artificialities are all stupid artificialities that were there. Like at the time you go to one of the queens parties — I must tell you about it because I’ve been to all this nonsense — and there are people who come in there, of course this Moss Bros. business again, they come in their tailcoats. And some get very tight ones and some get very loose ones, you see! (laughter) The tight ones walk with such a funny gait, you don’t know what to do, you feel like laughing all the time and they look like jokers, I tell you. Very nice dignified people look like jokers. And the others who have loose ones walk like Charlie Chaplin. (laughter) And I can never make them out, I tell you, I told CP, “Is he the same?” “Yes, he’s the same why?” I said, “I can’t make him out, he’s looking so different like Charlie Chaplin!”
Might be, Charlie Chaplin might have been to one of these such parties, I am sure, the way he had his dress made. Because this is absolutely there, I tell you. And then, they must have the tea, sit down this, that nonsense, you see. What I am saying [is] that all this trickles down to us from a man-made nonsensical idea.
We are sitting in the Kingdom of God. So we are not going to do all these things. We are not going to indulge into all such nonsensical things, because it gives such an artificial superiority and cuts you off from the rest of the world.
So I have to really tell you that, in this whatever has happened [is] that the kind of artificiality that was built up, the reality had to give up. It couldn’t bear any more of that artificiality, it was too much.
Now I have tried to find out why this difference like I have seen Jeremy [] and Robert [Hunter], they have become real Italians, I tell you. So once, we had gone for shopping and then we said, “Let’s have some ice cream!” Guido is very good at taking me to ice cream shops, because I never eat otherwise! So we were there and suddenly we heard a big laughter coming. I said, “Looks like some Sahaj Yogis coming this side.” It was Baba Mama and these two coming down to the same shop, and laughing so loudly, that even the Italians were looking at them that, “Who are these greater Italians who have come here?” Three of them laughing and laughing! And they saw us and they got a fright, because they were sitting. I said, “I am so happy to hear your laughter. All the way you came here and everybody was looking at you.” Because both of them know Italian language, they know another language.
There’s another thing with us is that we don’t want to learn any other language. Everyone will have to jolly well learn English language, otherwise we think they are all stupid fools. And we make fun of them. I have seen so many films here — they show so many little, little dramas sometimes some sort of series coming — where the show a French speaking English in a funny way, or a German speaking in a funny way. And also I think English can speak in quite a funny way to me! Sometimes it’s impossible. Like today, the ticket collector I don’t know what language he spoke, but I didn’t understand what he was talking, he was trying to be nice. But I was looking at him, I was about to ask him, “Now, what [is this] Oxford English, or is it Cambridge English? I don’t understand.” That’s how.
So what I am saying [is] that language is just for communication. But in the communication, if there’s no love, if there’s no genuineness, if there’s no feeling, concern, why do we want to communicate with anyone? Just a lip service is no good.
So now we are not only part and parcel of this world but of the whole. And everything circulates through you once you give up this insular feeling. But insulation is there, very much insulation, in the character, maybe because of England being an island. Except, as I was telling today to David [Spiro], that except for attacking other people and going into up to even China up to Australia, otherwise they are insulated!
So we must learn to watch ourselves, we must learn what is coming to us from our forefathers. This is the inheritance we have got! So suddenly we become lords, suddenly we become ladies, suddenly we become some sort of an English duke.
In India they made a lot of fun. You must have seen the dukes nose they have given the name to one projection of a mountain, they call it, “This is a dukes nose,” because some duke must have gone with a nose like that.
So we must learn to make fun of ourselves. Then all these things will disappear, and must understand that we are much higher people than this limited thing. It’s no good. And if we are following these old people then we can become bhootish with them, because they were quite bhoots, you can see them, they were quite bhoots, the way they did certain things. And now they are dead and gone, we are newly born, special people, we are flowers and we should be fragrant.
And this is what happened with Gavin, that he’s gone down too much. And this Valerie [Brown] is a character which is another horrible one. I just don’t know what to say about her — the less said the better. I mean I have never seen such a person writing such a horrible thing, I have never heard that such books are written for general reading. I mean in India [it’s] out of question! Even one sentence like that wont be permitted. Something that’s nauseating, absolutely nauseating. I couldn’t read of course, I am sorry to say. But whatever I heard about it. And there were a few lines, they read it and I said, “Baba! Stop it! Stop it! Stop it! I don’t want to vomit!”
So to just to have a style and this and that, it is not all right. We are the Spirit and the Spirit is the light, light all around us, all around our auras. There are people walking with a special type of a personality, what do we need style for? Who has better style than ours? We make our own styles, we are the makers of styles.
So to conform to some sort of a nonsensical idea and to secede yourself, to separate yourself, to cut yourself from the collective, is nonsensical.
Now this time, those who are going to India, I have to tell you one thing: that you must get mixed up with people. We’ll not have any camp which will have only English or this. And it’s a very common failing, we must face it. It’s a very common failing. Because now, I’m in England, so I’m also English, but I don’t have this failing in me. But I have seen Indians, when they live here, they become like this.
I went to a place called Mar del Plata in Argentina. It’s a very beautiful place, very beautiful colony of people. So I said, “Who are these people living here?” They said; “All Spanish, Italians, this, that.” “And English?” They said, “No! English have a separate colony of theirs.” But I wouldn’t be surprised tomorrow we have a separate colony of the English Indians; could be.
They say in Sanskrit, “Sangati sanga doshena,” means, if you live with somebody, you become like that. So we might have some dukes and duchesses in the Indian community also possibly tomorrow if they live here — quite possible. This is such a charged atmosphere, “We are something special.” And it shows so clearly when they do to another country, it creates problems. They cannot mix up with people, they cannot talk to others, all the time they think they are like some media people, trying to criticise.
The whole attitude is that we have to get mixed up with the whole ocean of Sahaj Yogis. Instead of that, if you behave like that, people think they are criticising us. That’s why I have said many a times that we cannot use the words “I like” or “I believe”. No, not to use. Because that is how you despise others “I don’t like this, I don’t like that.” You may not even have half of this in your own house, but they will say like that. You may not have food in the house to eat but when they go to somebody’s house, they say, “I don’t like this food.” That we don’t have to have. All these things I have seen in him (Gavin Brown) and that’s what I am telling you.
Of course there are many books to read and we can. One good quality about English is that they are scholarly, they have scholarship. They read a lot, they know a lot. Ordinary person will also know. Also it being a very small country, they know about little, little places. You go anywhere they know, “This glass is from Darlington, this is from here, that is from there.” Indians wouldn’t know anything! And if you ask them, “This sari comes from where?” Men, especially, women may tell you. Women will say, “I don’t know, must be from India is it? Or is it from Kenya?”
They know about birds, about from where they come. But all these things, you see, this knowledge sometimes can make us over nationalistic: “We the British!” It can come. Be careful on that point, to say, “We are the British.” We are not! We are not Indians, we are not British, we are nothing. We are gnostics. We are the ones who know. We are Yogis. Because this is such an artificial ego in our head and that has made people hate us, while we are here to love the whole world.
So our beauty lies in how much we love others. We must face ourselves: “How much do we love, others? How much do we care for others? How much do we enjoy others? How do I feel when I face another Sahaj Yogi?”
When I see you, a ripple of joy becomes like a thunder to me. I mean, I don’t know where I stand. And sometimes I feel I might just raise myself up in the heaven! That is the content within us of our Spirit. Not all these artificial things, they can never give us joy. They cannot give joy to anybody else.
We have to be very simple people. Simple doesn’t mean that you should just wear some little few clothes, it doesn’t mean that. Simple, means from your heart. For small, small things you should feel happy. Simple things should make you happy. And that is how we’ll get closer to each other.
Because this world has to be one. Now when it will be one Europe, what’s going happen to English I don’t know. They’ll have to jump in the sea I think because the way they will be encroached by all these people because they are in a way, in an English way, they are aggressive people, because if an Italian is there, he’ll just walk into your house and say, “What have you got for today’s dinner?” Quite possible! And you will say, “What’s this? It’s very unmannerly to walk in my house!”
Why do you have a house? Even a rat cannot walk into that house. You polish your, brass, you do all your cleanings, sweepings — for whom? There’s not even a rat in the house to come and see it. What’s the use of doing all this? [Might as well] live like pigs then, better is, [so as] not to waste energy. Because there’s not even a pig to come and see you!
All right the climate is such [that] we can’t leave the doors open, all right, but hearts can be open. I have had lots of experiences of this myself. But in Sahaj Yoga, if it crawls up, then I don’t think our Sahaj Yoga can prosper, or people can have that content.
The quality of Sahaj Yoga should be within us: how many people we give Realisation? How many people we can talk to? How much do we know about Sahaj Yoga? How much we have mastered it, how many people we get into Sahaj Yoga? Can we?
It’s the circulation of the heart that is important. And if you cannot circulate why are you living on the heart? This is the country of heart where Shiva lives, where He is pulsating in everything — is pulsating in everything — and there where you are there, then what you should do?
Circulation: how much you can circulate, articulate with people, rapport, understanding. Everywhere there’s joy, everywhere there’s understanding. Such oceans of depths people have but we must know how to penetrate into them. But if you want to have the pearls, you have to dive down. But if you want to live with the straw it is hanging there on the surface — live with it!
We have come to Sahaj Yoga to become great people. We have been British, all right finished now, done! But now we had a second birth, we have entered into the Kingdom of God, now we are here to become great people, great monarchs.
And these styles and all this have come from the so-called monarchs and kings and horrible people they were! Do you know that? They told me that Queen Elizabeth, the first one, had a kind of a funny patch here, they don’t know if she was a man or a woman, or whatever it is, whatever she was, man or a woman, or a person, this was the thing, she had a patch here. That’s why she made this kind of a collar for her which was standing here. And everybody had to wear that! And they said about Victoria also — I don’t want to say anything against her because I have great respect for her — but they say she developed a hump on the back so she developed these Victorian skirts.
So also you can see that hippyism started in England, punkism started in England. Imagine the punks! They are mad! And when I went to an exhibition in Rome, beautiful exhibition it was, we were passing from one country to another country, to another country, and there, I thought of England, because I have become English as I told you. He said, “Where is UK?” He said, “It’s there!” And there were about six seven boys mostly from Italy, and three, four girls laughing, “Ha! Ha!” I said, “What’s happening there? What’s the matter? Why are they laughing at the English, when the English laugh at everyone?” And you know what was that? It was a punk shop — that’s the only thing they had for exhibition, believe me.
Holey pants, holey, H O L E Y ! Holey pants and they had these — what you call them, what do you call I don’t know? We call toora in Hindi language that kind of thing — and all that, they were selling there. And they said, “It’s all genuine, genuine, genuine from England.” And all of these Italians were laughing. So I asked Flavia, “Why are they laughing at these British?” He said, “Mother, we have a sense of ridicule, we have a great sense of ridicule.” While these people were thinking, “So what? What’s wrong? If I cut my nose what’s wrong?”
So ultimately we end up into this kind of a stupidity, as you know, that a person who has this kind of an ego becomes an idiot. And there are many things which you can see clearly how, how we thought that we were something great and how people befooled us.
There’s a great writer in Hindi language called as Premchand. I must tell you his story it’s very interesting. We had English in India and we knew how to befool them, I must tell you, frankly. And there were two Englishmen going in a Benares street. And mostly in Benares, they have their WCs on top in the open. They sit there. And we carry our jar, lota (round water pot), they call it lota with the water. Somebody put the lota there, and suddenly, with some sort of a thing, it fell down. And it just fell down — are you recording me? Hello? Now don’t record this. You want to record it? Only for English all right. But don’t give it to anybody else! (laughter)
So the lota fell down. And he describes, “Fell on the feet of those where many Indians go and put there heads.” So I said, “What that must be?” They were the feet of two Englishmen. And then the Englishmen got angry, because according to their country’s law nothing can be hurt. And they took the lota they said, “We are taking you to the police now. This has hurt us so much!” So, the man who was upstairs came running, said, “Sorry, sorry!” He said, “Nothing doing, we are going to take you to the police! It has hurt us. You had no business to keep a lota there that it fell on our feet.”
In India, nobody compensates. But if an Englishman comes and says, all right, they’ll say, “Baba, it’s all right, what to do?”
So there was one fellow who thought of a trick. He knew English. He said, “See, you can take them to police. At most police will fine them a little bit. But do you know this lota?” He said, “What?” “This lota belonged to Akbar. Akbar used to carry this lota with him, so instead of taking them if you ask for this lota will be a good idea its an antique piece you see. Will be good for you Akbar the great used to take this!”
And he told in Hindi language to them that, “I have befooled them and I have told then this belonged to Akbar and you just say that ‘We don’t want to give this lota and you can take us to police!’ So they said, “Now, all right. If you give us this lota, then we’ll forgive you!” So these people said, “No we don’t want to give this lota.” “Why?” “Because it belonged to Akbar! How can we give such a lota? He was our forefather. We can’t give our lota to you!”
So then the English said, “All right, then are you willing to come to police?” “Yes, yes, we are willing to come to police but we can’t give you this lota!” So they paid lot of money for that lota and bought it. (laughter) And they were very proud, you see. And they took that lota and they must have put it in some frame to say that this is was the lota which was carried by Akbar.
So this is how it is. So first we must have respect for other cultures, other things and other people and other countries and try to see what they have good about them. Otherwise nothing will penetrate into you and you will be left high and dry all your life.
There’s so many nice things in this world. Say you go to Italy — see the beautiful work they do, the furniture they make, things they make. Once they come to England I don’t know what’s going to happen to us. We had lots of beautiful art and we had talents, but all finished now, nobody is having that. And when they come here what is going to happen?
In machinery, when the Germans come here, they’ll finish us off.
So we have to realise that these outside things and thinking that we are something great, is not greatness. Greatness is within yourself, within your heart. And it is so much, so much evident, so much evident here, that it’s really shocking.
As a reaction to all that formalities and all that, people might have taken to very casual dresses, all right. But that’s not the way, because from inside it has to go.
All these ideas have to be washed off completely, cleaned off. And we have to know that we are the ones, we have to give light of the Spirit to the whole world. And how can we cover and cloud ourselves with all these funny ideas?
And that’s why so many of you, you have asked me questions about Gavin. Only thing I have to say [is] that, to this extent, only an Englishman can go because he can forgive himself. To this extent nobody else can go. Nobody has done like this. No one has done like this. We had so many people removed from Sahaj Yoga, you know that very well. But the way he has gone down and the way he was with us for the last fourteen years, it’s surprising. And I understand that people ask me questions, I understand why it is happening.
But be careful now! Let us not be lost with these foolish stupid ideas we had. And let us be something great. Let us be within ourselves, see for ourselves.
No amount of arrogance, no amount of artificiality is going to give us any special personality, except that we realise what we are. And when we know what we are, we enjoy ourselves, we never get bored, we enjoy ourselves — never get bored.
So at the beginning of the programme I have to say that I have seen the Sahaj Yogis if they want to be good they can be really very good people, in England, because the quality of intelligence is much better, perhaps, also their scholarship is very good. But when they fall, they fall also very fast and go down very much. So on what we have to depend is our step where we are standing and what step we are going to take further.
For example meditating: Dr. Brian Wells told me that people don’t want to meditate in the ashram. Now meditation is very important, is the only way we can grow.
Now all right, people used to get up, say about ten o’clock before. But do you don’t get drunk, why should you get up at ten o’clock? You have to get up in the morning. You have to look after yourself: means you have to look after your Spirit! And that’s what we have to achieve. And I know if you all decide you can do it very well. Among yourselves is [a] better understanding but when it comes to others it seems there’s some sort of a communication gap which [there] should not be.
If the Germans could be that gentle and so sweet. You’ve seen the German people who are Sahaj Yogis — even to touch a flower is easier than to touch a German I tell you they have become so gentle, because they have learnt a lesson. And I asked a German, “What’s the matter with English? Why haven’t they learnt a lesson?” He answered me back, which is a very important thing to know, “They have never lost a war Mother. They have to lose one war, they’ll be all right.”
So the gentleness, which is not outward, which is not just a lip service, but from within: “How can they hurt someone?”
I mean, I had to put myself into a frame of mind to talk to you like this. And I didn’t know how many flowers I should weave round my words so that it should not hurt you. And even then [in] the back of my mind, there’s a kind of a sadness, because I love you so much and it shows that I have stayed with you the most of the time. You are specially privileged. But that should give you greater humility. Because whatever are my qualities they should be much more in you and be shown to people that they should [say], “Oh, English, we can make out, they’re like Mother to look at. They are like Mother to behave. They are just like Mother.” Let me hear that. All right?
So it’s a promise to me — is it all right? — on an Ashtami day. Let us finish all these negativities and let us become that special type of people who are worshipped all over. All right?
May God Bless You.