17 September 1983
Shri Ekadasha Rudra Puja: We have to drop out many things
Judy Gaddy's Apartment, New York (United States)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

So today is a day, according to Indian calendar, called as ‘Parivartani Ekadashi’.
Now, today is the eleventh day of the moon. Eleventh day is ‘ekadashi’. Also, in Sahaja Yoga, you know about Ekadasha Rudra, which is here (forehead); which will ultimately destroy all those things which are not required anymore. That is Ekadasha here, that’s the eleventh.
But today is a special day where we are going to use the power of Ekadasha to do the ‘parivartan’ means ‘the transformation’. It’s not for destruction but for transformation. It’s such a day to be here in New York, where we use the destructive powers for the transformation of human beings. So, it’s a very great day today that we are going to transform people by the manifestation of the Ekadasha’s powers. And they are eleven placed over your forehead here, and you know how they work out.
So, these ten come out of the destructive powers of the Void. The Void has got ten destructive powers also. Out of those ten, the destructive part settles down here (pointing to upper forehead). So when a person is on his destruction, say for example a cancer is set in, then you might feel a throb here, at the apex of your Void, the throb. And it doesn’t logically mean that if there’s a throb there’s a cancer, but if there’s a cancer there will be a throb in here going on. That means the force of life is trying to push it. But the obstruction there (forehead), starts accumulating on both the sides.
And in the centre is the centre of Vishuddhi, of the Virata, where Shri Krishna has become the Virata, the Great Primordial Being. So this is the eleventh power of destruction (centre of forehead). He has the power called ‘Samhara shakti’ by which he kills people.
So before killing them and finishing them off, in the compassion of your Mother, we have to first try to transform them. If they cannot be transformed then it’s all right, then Ekadasha takes over. So these eleven very great destructive powers will be used by the Kalki, the One who is going to manifest on a white horse.
Before that, today is a very great day that these powers we are going to use for transformation. Now how can destructive powers be used for transformation? First of all, when people know that there are destructive powers manifesting, they start fearing, they get afraid that, “We’ll be destroyed so we must take to God!” That’s one of the ways.
Secondly, if a person comes to know about any destructive disease like cancer, he wants to find out a method, and there is no method available on a human level. So then he thinks of God and wants to come nearer to God. The fear brings him closer to God. He depends on God more than on his rationality, [more] than on his ego or superego. And he wants to depend on God’s powers to cure him or to save him from his destruction; because he is now on the brink of destruction. As soon as cancer is set in, he knows that there’s no end to it and he has to be destroyed.
So, this is another way the people take to transformation, to change their attitudes, to change their value systems. I have known of many husbands or wives who got cancer and their counterparts became very mild, gentle, kindly, romantic people. They tried to give all the love, all the protection, all the good things to a person who is going to die now of Ekadasha. So a kind of a transforming temperament starts coming in a man, that he sees that the person with whom he has lived all his life is now going to be no more. So a kind of beautiful feelings towards the person, of giving whatever you have beautiful within you, starts. And that’s how people develop another kind of personality which was never apparent before. So all the harshness and the aggressiveness drops out, and all the sweetness starts pouring in. So the compassion in a man is awakened, by which he gets transformed.
Many people who lost their relations, kith and kin, become much more gentle, kindlier people, because Ekadasha has expressed its awe. And also another kind of a fear comes into the mind of the people that, “Tomorrow this can happen to me also! So, I must do something about it.” So at this time Sahaja Yoga helps them a lot. They come to Sahaja Yoga because such an emergency is created within themselves and thus they are rushed for their transformation to Sahaja Yoga.
But there’s another subtler way this destructive force helps us, by destroying all that is negative within us. Because unless and until that negative is destroyed within us, we cannot become people who can enter into the kingdom of God. We have our ego, we have our superego and both can be represented here (at Ekadasha Rudra). When you have your ego, very much great ego, then you’ll find a big blob-like ego coming out on this [left] side; a very big one, here. Or if you have a superego you can see another big thing jutting out on the brain here [right side]. So on both the sides you might get both the things if both the sympathetics are overactive in you.
If you are not a very collective person also, you might get a blob here [in the centre]. So, you might get all the thing filled up with your ego, superego and this Virata’s centre again blown up, in a way that a person develops a face like a monster sometimes. This portion becomes too big, thick, jutting out. And there’s a character I have seen like that. I think it is Frankenstein or someone. Is it? Frankenstein; yes, that has come from the Unconscious — the Frankenstein character. All this is swollen up, jutting out, and this place like that. That’s really the one that happens to human beings, when he becomes a devil himself. So this is how the Ekadasha works within us, to destroy our negativity within us.
In India, so many people fast on this day, for atonement, on the eleventh day is very common, you must do ‘ekadashi’. All the Hindus and all these people do ‘ekadashi’ – that is the eleventh day – they don’t eat anything at all. But you shouldn’t do it after the advent of your Mother, because, I’m the Ekadasha myself! So, why should you do it now when I’ve come? It was done when I was not here, just to call me, so now I’m back here, you need not do this anymore, the penance of ‘ekadashi’. But you have to be careful.
Now Ekadasha comes, as I told you, from the Void. So firstly, it comes when you accept someone as your guru, say, who are false, who are anti-God, anti-Christ. So you developed a kind of a thickness on this side when it is the person whom you are worshipping as a guru, or respecting as a guru, as a guru to you, who is not really a guru. So you develop a superego which shows on this side, this part.
Now the other side of it shows when a person says, “I’m my own guru, and I’m practising my own meditation. I have nothing to do with anybody’s guidance. I am quite all right as I am.” Such a person develops the other half. So you have this half developed because of that [ego], and this half developed because of the superego that you get from these false and fake gurus.
Now what happens sometimes [is] that, when you get involved into this kind of superego behaviour, at that time, it so happens that you might take over from them and start using it for your ego. That’s the worst time for you. At that time what you do is to act like the devils yourself. And once you start doing that, your Ekadasha is completely finished. And then I don’t think it’s easy to get rid of it. It’s very difficult. But if it is one-sided, it’s much easier to do it.
So today is the day which is called as ‘the Ekadasha which is going to bring the transformation’. When you are transformed, so many things are automatically destroyed within you. As you can see very clearly that all your misidentifications drop out. The misidentification that, “I’m an American,” that, “I’m a Christian” or “I’m a Jew,” “I am this, I am that.” All these false misidentifications drop out of you and you become a naked human being. First of all, you are a human being and then a super-human being, without the ego, without the ego. So your ego is destroyed, your superego is destroyed, your conditionings are destroyed and all your false ideas about knowledge are destroyed. So what remains and emerges out is the reality.
Now see when a flower becomes the fruit: everything, practically, drops out of the flower, we can say. Like the calyx is dropped out, then the petals are dropped out, and then the epicalyx is there, that is also dropped out; but what remains is the seed, actually if you see. Around the seed all these things develop and the fruit remains, the rest of it drops out. In some fruits some part is used, in some fruits nothing is used, a very little growth comes out as fruit and becomes the fruit while the flowers are there. So in us also, whatever becomes, Spirit remains, the rest drops out. And that is what it is when we call it the ekadasha which brings forth the transformation. And one has to understand we have to drop out many things.
Some people I have seen they say, “What’s wrong? I am smoking, still my vibrations are all right”. Some say, “What’s wrong? I am drinking, still my vibrations are  on.” “I’m going to this guru, still my vibrations are there,”  “I’m having the same type of licentious life, still my vibrations are there.” Now it goes a very long way [and] the vibrations are still there, but suddenly they stop, and you find you are out of the bounds, you are thrown out completely. But you do not feel how you are thrown out. Gradually you find, with a tangent you go out. And so one has to be careful about that. So within us lies a force which is centrifugal and a force that is centripetal. So Ekadasha’s force is centrifugal: by which you are thrown out.
Sahaj Yoga doesn’t fall onto anybody’s feet, it doesn’t request anyone, it doesn’t flatter anyone. If you want to be there, you have to be positively there, and if you don’t want to be there it throws you much faster than what you want! That’s the trouble with Sahaja Yoga is. And this is the loophole of the Sahaja Yoga, which I must tell you as a Mother: that it’s very anxious to throw you out.
I’ll tell you, when Christine, just now she told me also, got engaged to Michael, half of them were thrown out, because they had a conception that you must have a romance before marriage [that] without a romance, if you have a marriage, then there should be no marriage. I don’t know on what conception it is based. But if you have the romance before the marriage, what’s the fun of having the marriage? I mean it’s like, if you have to give somebody a present, you hide it, you see, keep it to that date, and give the surprise to the children! In the same way if you have the romance already done, what’s a marriage? What’s the celebration for? It’s absolutely illogical. There is no romance in such cases. Actually, you have seen that after the romance, the marriage, and the divorce. It’s always like that. Because you become stale, and you find the romance you had before marriage was something, a fantasy, that has dropped out, and now after marriage there is nothing left to enjoy, so you are fed up and next month you are in the divorce case!
But the marriages that take place without the romance, kept all reserved for a particular day, just for that day when you are going to have the real romance, and real feeling of oneness, everything. In India it’s a very big thing, you see, the first night of the married people. And that’s why our marriage last. You know, I would say, I’m an old woman of 60 years, my husband 63 years, and you can see how romantic he is still. You see, the romance never finishes. Because it starts on an auspicious day with the sanction of the collectivity, everybody taking interest in that romance. It is such a big thing to be married, all the people enjoying the marriage, and enjoy [inaudible], enjoy-.
Sahaja Yogini: Would you like some fruit Mother?
Shri Mataji: No, no. Thank you, that’s good.
So now, this kind of thing, when happens to the people who are Western people, who think romance is very important. But I don’t think one can learn anything from the marriage system of the Western people, because all their marriage system is absolutely in a dwindle down. There’s nothing to be learned from them as far as that is concerned. We can learn many other things. For example, we can learn how to operate a camera. But to operate a marriage is better you learn from Indians.
We have a very solid system of marriage. First of all, the way they are trained from childhood: how to make a marriage successful. Such a lot of importance is given. Then without the horoscope, they will not marry. Without the auspicious day, they won’t marry. Everything they work out in such details so that the marriage cannot fizzle out. Moreover it is worked in such a collective way.
For example, supposing my husband wants to trouble me, say for example, you see. So, the sister of my husband will take him to task. Everybody can interfere if they try to do anything against the marriage. Everyone in the family will be after the person who tries to break the marriage. And so everyone knows that, “I’ll be left high and dry”, you see, “if I have a divorce”. Nobody has place in the society.
But in England when we went first, we were shocked! They had no shame about this, “I’m already divorced thrice and this is the fourth woman I am living with”.So shocking for us! Oh God! To us, a divorce means worse than leprosy! Why are you divorced? What’s the problem? How can you be divorced? Such an auspicious thing is the marriage! Such a blessing it is. It is God blessed. How can you do it? It’s such a big fall! And that’s how it works out. And in no way we are less than you people as marriage because we can produce much more children than you can produce. And children only want to be born in India not anywhere else. You will be surprised. That’s the problem we are facing.
Our population problem comes from the point that the marriages are so successful, the people are so peaceful, that children hate to be married [born?] in nightmares of New York. Naturally! Because you don’t know where will be the mother tomorrow, and where will be the father.
Now we are blamed for a high rate of fertility, but what to do? Children don’t listen. They don’t want to go to all such places where there’s no stability for them to exist. Especially the Realised children, if they are of a very high quality, they do. I mean, they have to be like daredevils to get into this thing, so they may try. Or maybe real devils, to take advantage of it. But normally, people who want peace in life, who want joy in life, and the love of their parents, want to be born in India. And that’s why, recently you’ll find that India is growing so fast in population that we don’t know what to do. So, this marriage system came in, which shocked them because they couldn’t understand that there has to be a romance, and this and that.
Now the more understanding of Ekadasha that should be there, that we should not allow it to be built within us in any way, because these are self-destroying things. It starts with doubting. When you start doubting Sahaja Yoga, the build-up starts [Shri Mataji shows the Ekadasha Rudras points on her forehead]. And the doubting starts building up throughout the “medha”, is this, the plate here, you see. And it can become a thick big plate there.
Like today, I saw that lady saying, “Touch wood”, you see “Touch wood”, means this wood [Mother touches her forehead]. “Touch wood” means there should be no wood here any more, you see. Or you can say, “Touch stone.” [Laughter] If you say something like a bragging you can say, “No, no, touch wood”. And I am not meaning that. I mean, people are quite conscious – unconsciously they say it – but they are quite conscious not to say something that would sort of give an idea of boastful nature, or something bragging, or something big so that it may go wrong. So they say, “Touch wood”. This is the wood, this Ekadasha, they mean.
So we are quite conscious of this force building within us. And now we have to be conscious that this force is going to transform people. So today, we are going to pray that, “This force has to transform America through its capacity to frighten people, so that they come to Sahaja Yoga”.
Because when things have reached this stage of ego, then when people say, “What’s wrong?” – like in England when I started talking, first, they said, “This is Victorian woman, out of date, absolutely useless!” I said, “All right, I don’t say anything, but you will have such diseases that you’ll have to come back”. That was the time [when] they passed the law that homosexuality should be allowed, permissiveness should be allowed, and all these things should be allowed. And now you have AIDS. You have AIDS now here already operating. Now the AIDS has given the fear of the Ekadasha. Now have it, “What’s wrong?” What about that?
So this awe and this fear is very important, is an extremely important thing that we must have the awe and the fear that God is Almighty and we are nothing before Him. Here we have to remember that we are part and parcel of that God, and that we have to awaken ourselves to the consciousness that He is the Whole and we have become one with the Whole; that’s how we are going to overcome our Ekadasha.
So today I bless you all with the power of Ekadasha which is going to transform.
May God bless you all, in your work which you are trying to do for the good of Americans. It is your responsibility to save America. You know it is a Vishuddhi chakra and all the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga rests on Vishuddhi chakra! So how important it is that this transformation is to take place. Unless and until the transformation comes in, you will see, it will not work out. You cannot talk to people, you cannot communicate with them. So you must pray that: ‘Transformation process must start, must trigger, and must gallop, and must go on spreading like wildfire’. This should be our prayer today.
May God bless you. [Hindi about starting the puja]
… And this sets in when Shiva is angry because Shiva is the real Rudra. And His powers are given to Ekadasha. Shiva is the real ultimate dissolution. He’s the one who will dissolve the whole world. But He gives these eleven powers of destruction. He has twelve powers, out of which one he keeps to himself for the ultimate (destruction) and eleven he gives to Ekadasha. And when that happens, the Ekadasha starts acting in human beings. So today, I was thinking, we’ll have first Ganesha puja and then Rudradashi.
[Puja starts][Conversation about towels][A child says that she brings her toys, the Smurfs.]Shri Mataji: Ah, good idea, put them done, yes. Good idea.
There’s a new one, I saw a picture, “Coming of Jedi”.Sahaja Yogi: Oh, yes.Shri Mataji: In that, they show these people – what you call them- Teddy bears. They are all Sahaja Yogis. [Laughter]Have you seen that picture?Sahaja Yogis: Yes.Shri Mataji: It’s very nice. It’s really there- you see- Sahaja Yogis, the way they manage things. So sweet they are. It’s a very good idea actually, a very good idea.
And they show the right side. And then the left side. You see, both sides they’ve shown in that picture, you see. First, the right-sided people, then the left-sided people and the Teddy bears. Wonderful, really![To a boy] Bring them [the toys, Smurfs] and put them all over, yes. They should be present here.[Conversation with children about the best place to put the toys.]They are all the Ganas on the left-hand side.
All this comes from the Unconscious, you see. One should see this picture “Return of Jedi”. It’s absolutely the manifestation of the Unconscious, in such a beautiful way.
Sahaja Yogi: Did you see Star trek yet, Mother?Shri Mataji: I beg your pardon?Sahaja Yogi: Did you see Star trek yet?
Shri Mataji: Yes, I did. Yes. Who showed me, I think you people.Sahaja Yogis: That was Star Wars.Shri Mataji: Star wars, yes, Star wars. Which one is this?Sahaja Yogi: Star trek.Shri Mataji: Star check.Sahaja Yogi: Star trek, yes.Shri Mataji: That, I did not see. That’s the same thing?Sahaja Yogi: No, Mother. It’s different but I though, You might like to see that. It’s very interesting.Shri Mataji: All right, all right. I’ll see it some time.Sahaja Yogi: Yes.Shri Mataji: All right?Sahaja Yogini: Mother, did You see the Dark Cristal?Shri Mataji: Which one?Sahaja Yogini: The Dark Cristal.Shri Mataji: No, I did not see that.Sahaja Yogini: You might like that.Shri Mataji: All right.Boy: Yes, the Dark Cristal.Another boy: I want to see that.
Shri Mataji: Now, this one I saw is very near, you see, very near Sahaja Yoga. How it is coming in, you see, these things, it’s so clear.
Shri Mataji: [About a Smurf] Now, look at this! Why are you sleeping? You have to be awake. [Laughter]You cannot sleep. How can they be sleeping? I will put them right. You should all stand up. They are all falling down. [Shri Mataji is fixing the toy]
Sahaja Yogi: That’s what You do for us, Mother. You wake us all.[Conversation with children about the toys.]Shri Mataji: These are the antibodies [about the Smurfs].
I think yesterday’s tape should be again sent to London. It would be a good idea. So it will be analysed, you have, you see, it was quite a fast movement.Sahaja Yogi: Yes.Shri Mataji: So that you can rewrite it. And then you will know that I have said quite a lot of things there, like, where the mistake lay; I mean, it’s very, very, you see, significant.Because I think, because of these mistakes, people cannot differentiate between a good guru and a fake guru. Because of these mistakes, that you have to go, because not understanding that it is vertical.
Shri Mataji: How did he like my lecture? Was that very clear yesterday?Seeker: Oh, very much, yes, yes. ExcellentShri Mataji: That was correct what I said was – that was the mistake, you see? I think of all the people who got Realisation, they try to explain it their own way. Because, after all, this knowledge, how far they can go, isn’t it? Like Buddha has thought that if you talk about God, it conditions people. Better not talk about God because every body’s starting thinking, “We are God”. You see, if you tell them about God, everybody becomes a God. So, he thought, “Better talk about the Self-realisation only. Better not talk about God”.Because if you talk about God, then nobody wants to seek the Self. They think they are God. Or about the God which is Formless. Then they say, “This is Formless”. So, they just start doing some other thing.
That’s why he did not talk about God. He said, “Better not talk about God. Just talk about the Spirit”.Same thing with Mahavira. He also, both of them, tried to put the attention of people fixed on the Atma. ‘Atma Bodha’, the knowledge of the Self and all that. This was the reason why they did not talk of God. Because the people were getting very much diverted.
[Puja goes on]Sahaja Yogi: Mataji, namastase, namastase, namoh namaha.Shri Mataji: Kya [what]?Sahaja Yogi: Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu.[Hindi conversation][Mantras]
[While putting Kajal]Shri Mataji: You didn’t get this time the silver- for keeping it. You’ve got it or not? I just wanted to find out.Sahaja Yogini: I have it.Shri Mataji: All right. You see, I’m just thinking about what I will be giving you people, next time.
[While combing her hair]Shri Mataji: I think you all should take photographs, because I’ve seen, these days, the photographs are so wonderful. And you really all have become great photographers, I must say.
Sahaja Yogi: It’s a great subject, Mother.Shri Mataji: I tell you, tremendous! I mean, the photographs are so beautiful. I think, somebody asked me once, “Are these professionals who have done it?” I said, “No. Some of them are taking photographs for the first time”. You know, the photograph on Advent is taken by Paul [unsure], first time, he took it. For the first time he touched a camera.
He is someone who got the Realisation first in England. Because I think the first ones are rather strict people. [Unclear] is one of them. [Laughter][Indian Sahaja Yogi in Hindi]Shri Mataji: Very strict! And that’s a good thing. Somebody has to put some strictness because Mother is no good.[Indian Sahaja Yogi in Hindi]
Shri Mataji: [Aside] Thank you.
[Shri Mataji is giving instructions about the puja]
[Conversation in Hindi]
[While putting Kumkum on her hands and on the last phalanx of the left hand’s fingers]Shri Mataji: It’s a Vishudhi work, you see. One has to do the whole hand. You can’t leave it open, so much of heat.Can you feel the heat coming out of your hands?Sahaja Yogini: Yes.
[Conversation in Hindi]
Shri Mataji: Vibrations are so much![A Sahaja Yogini is doing the same on Shri Mataji’s right hand]
Sahaja Yogi: Indian people go backstage. Just let the married ladies step forward.
[Ladies put the sari around Shri Mataji]Shri Mataji: You must tie it up also.
First, the garland, this one first. First this garland, or this garland you see.Woah! Good. You see, this is the whole universe!Sahaja Yogi: 16 thousand.Shri Mataji: 16 thousand.[Sahaja Yoginis hold a very long garland]
You are making the map of America when you are holding.[Laughter]In the center, between the two feet.How many states you are?Sahaja Yogis: Fifty states.
Shri Mataji: [To a Sahaja Yogini] Can you take off?If you bring the mirror, hold on. Somebody has to tie [the crown; unclear] on me. Just hold it.
Perfect![Inaudible] Kumkum with my hand. That’s why I always do my hands later, they won’t [unclear]Good now. Beautiful.
[Conversation in Hindi][Shri Mataji is taking a prasad and vibrates the cake platter. She takes one.] Thank you.
This is to finish off all the whites [laddhus].
Sahaja Yoga: We all will stand up and take arti now.Shri Mataji: You all can put a hand, touch him, yes.[3 times the conch]“Saba ko dua…”[End of video]
[FROM 27:46 ON AUDIO ONLY][Hindi, about Shri Adi Shakti][Ganesha mantra 3 times][Puja starts][Conversation about towels]
Shri Mataji: So, as I told you, this Power creates the “O” [unclear] to take to God, which is very important. Already, I told you, we had a big hurricane here and many trees were uprooted. Let’s see what other things happen to create the “O”.Sahaja Yogi: [In Hindi about Ganesha Atharva Shirsha]Sahaja Yogini: Would you like some more tea, Mother?Shri Mataji: No, that will do I think for the time being.
Now, who can do the – [Conversation in Hindi about the pujaris]All right.
Now if you are sitting- [unclear] better to be that side, because you have to give.Now [Conversation in Hindi]The children can move this side a little bit. No, both of you should sit there.[Conversation in Hindi]
Have you got Kumkum?Sahaja Yogini: Yes.
Shri Mataji: Christine, you come here. Christine is better. Christine, do you know?Sahaja Yogi: Yes.Shri Mataji: Now let her sit here.
Shri Mataji: You can put a swastika.Ah! Better now? [Shri Mataji says a mantra: ‘Om sakchat superego mardini’?]
You understood yesterday what I said about these, that you see the psychologists created the first mistake by saying that it is in layers. The advantage was taken by these groups that you have to go through all this nonsense.Seeker: Acha.Shri Mataji: But it is not in layers it is vertically placed. And your path is absolutely kept properly there. Because you must understand that God is the Greatest Organiser, the Greatest Engineer. How can he make you in layers like this, that you have to go back into your unconscious?So these gurus have taken, these horrible fellows, have taken the advantage of this, you see.
Good?A little bit. [Shri Mataji is having tea.]
[Puja starts.]The little boys, children, have to do the first Ganesha.[Hindi conversation] Atharva Shirsha can be translated by someone who can read it. Where is the English one? So, who will read it? Patrick, will you read it? Come. Let him say it in Sanskrit and then the translation must be said.So, let’s the children wash my feet, that’s the best.[To children] Come along. All of them. Move it that side, this one. Yes, move it, move it.[Atharva Shirsha is read in Sanskrit.]Now, so those who have not washed my feet before should come.
Now you all have to tell me your names, that’s important. I think for people at a time will do. All right? Come forward.[Atharva Shirsha is read in English.]
Now you are understanding the meaning of every word, you see? Because you have experienced it. It was fist just to talk, talk, talk, talk. Now it’s an experience, you are the key. How did you become the key? You have to be there; I cannot manage alone.
Now, should we get the –What’s your name?Sahaja Yogi: Richard.Sahaja Yogini: Gertrude.Shri Mataji: May God bless you.
Now you say the mantra. Now put your hands down. You start with the mantra.
Shri Mataji: You did some mantra or something, did you? You didn’t tell me your name.Sahaja Yogi: My name is Antonio.Shri Mataji: Antonio, you did some mantras Antonio?Yes, with Steven who’s here.Sahaja Yogi: No before. [Inaudible]Antonio: No, I didn’t.Shri Mataji: No.
Sahaja Yogini: It’s better to be here.Shri Mataji: It’s Vishudhi, that’s all. Left Vishudhi here. Are you all right now? Are you feeling better in the hands? Are you feeling the cool breeze or not? Only thing, this chakra is a little bit obstructed, that is why you are not feeling.Just see his Vishudhi. Just press it, a little bit. Sit down, sit down. Antonio? It will work out. It’s not that you are not- you are all right but only, you are not feeling it because of the Vishudhi. So many times it happens. May God bless you.
Just watch me, all right? You’ve got it but only thing, you cannot feel it. If there is a pressure on these nerves, you cannot feel it. Little bit to be released. Just see, is it showing?Warren: No, Mother. It’s quite still.Shri Mataji: Good now?Warren: Except that there is this tremendous heat in the Vishnu granthi, just in the middle, just below.Shri Mataji: Because now, it is released.Warren: And it’s a bump there too, a big bump.Shri Mataji: Little breathing hold your breath. Ah, now better.Sahaja Yogi: Yes.Shri Mataji: Again.Warren: Hold your breath.Shri Mataji: You have to hold it.Warren: You have to hold it. Take a deep breath. Now hold it.Shri Mataji: Now, leave.Warren: Now, leave.Shri Mataji: Better? Again. Hold it again.All right?Warren: It’s cooling down.
Shri Mataji: Just see if his vibrations are all right. [Conversation in Hindi]You come from which country, Antonio?Antonio: From Italy.Shri Mataji: You live there? You had lived there?Antonio: I lived there most of my life.Shri Mataji: Most of your life.Antonio: Yes, except one year in United States, three years in Iran.Shri Mataji: In Iran. When was this?Antonio: This was-Shri Mataji: During the travel?Antonio: No, just- well, it was during the beginning of what we know that is a travel. From, 1975 and 1976 and 1979.
Shri Mataji: Put right to the left.[Conversation in Hindi][Puja is still going on][Something is falling down]Shri Mataji: As you say Rudras, you see. They are already active. [Laughter]
So, the first step is the description about the Rudra Shakti, what it does, what are the qualities of the Rudra Shakti. Now the destructive power. And secondly is the asking for the protection of various things from this. This is called as ‘abhisheka’, is the pouring of water, is called ‘abhisheka’. Also when you put the crown on the head, it’s also called as ‘abhisheka’.[Conversation in Hindi]
This water is for vibrated water, wonderful. This one is to be used for all the patients, everything, it’s very important. But don’t touch it inside.[Conversation in Hindi]You are not to touch, all right? Now one by one, you bring it there.Sahaja Yogi: You have to bring the milk. It’s yoghurt, isn’t it?Shri Mataji: Sugar. Where’s the spoon? It’s better to [inaudible]. All right.That’s all, that’s all, you don’t need to more. You can keep the sugar on that side, all right? Only milk we might need.Now, first of all, he has to pour a little bit this, it’s the ghee, this one. It’s quite a lot [inaudible].
[Mantras]She’s got the hundred and eight names of the Goddess.Sahaja Yogi: The hundred and eight names of the Goddess, that I will say, and the flowers to be offered to Shri Mataji.Shri Mataji: Who is there from- By groups, you can do it, you see.[End of audio]