18 June 1988
Seminar Day 1, Introspection and Meditation
Shudy Camps Park, Shudy Camps (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Advice, “Introspection and Meditation”. Shudy Camps (UK), 18 June 1988.
This year we won’t be having I think, public programs in UK, because also there are certain circumstances. But whenever there is a circumstance which, somehow or other, changes our programs, we must immediately know that there is a purpose behind all that change, and we must immediately accept it with an open heart that Divine wants us to change. Supposing I am going on a road and people say, “You are lost your way Mother.” That’s all right. I am never lost because I am with myself! (Laughter.) I had to go by that particular road, is the point. I had to do it, and that’s why I have, supposed to be not on that road and I have lost my way.
If you have that kind of a understanding, and if you have that satisfaction in your heart, then you’ll find life is worth much more than what you think it to be.
Now, as it is, what was the reason, I thought, that we have decided to have public programs this year definitely, and we could not have public programs? So, the reason is that we have to consolidate. In the growth of a tree, which is a living tree, it happens that it moves in a particular direction up to a point till it has to change, because there is no sun coming that side, maybe there is no water levels arriving, so they start changing. In the same way, one has to understand that we are in the hands of the Divine, and if some plans are changed, it is reflecting back on us, and we have to see why. And the why of it is that we have to consolidate.
Consolidation of Sahaja Yogis is very important. The first thing to consolidate yourself, you must do introspection. You must do introspection, is to reflect the light within and see for yourself: what have you done so far in Sahaja Yoga? Where were you? How far you have gone and how far you have to go. What is the thing that is lacking in you?
You’ll be surprised when you start seeing yourself – in a very unbiased manner, not justifying yourself – not blaming any bhoots, or need not blame any badhas within you, or somebody else. If you start yourself [seeing] what has gone wrong with you that you could not consolidate yourself properly, you’ll be amazed that there has been problems still lingering on which must be corrected.
Now these problems you can see very clearly. In the light of the Spirit you can see them very clearly that, “This has gone wrong with me.” One of the most interesting things I’ve noticed is that Sahaja Yoga is all the time covered with some sort of a maya. And this maya is ignorance, complete ignorance sometimes, sometimes partially. Now when you get into Sahaja Yoga you get blessed. You get blessed maybe, your family gets blessed, your children get blessed. You get some sort of a blessing for your physical being. Also for financial [side], you get jobs, you get money, you get something exceptional, which is really miraculous. Now people get very much lost in those achievements and start drifting, thinking that, “Oh, this is the blessing we have got now. We don’t have to do anything anymore,” that you are being rewarded sufficiently for whatever you have done so far. That’s not so! Is just a sort of a support to you comes so that your faith should be fully established in Sahaja Yoga. And specially, you should know Me, what I am.
But, if you go on still drifting, then maybe some of these blessings may turn out to be curses, and you might feel that what a curse it has fallen upon us and how it has gone in the wrong way.
For some people it takes time to feel, to get to the feel of the blessings. For example, mostly, according to the modern ideas, we think that to get more money is the biggest blessing. So, so many get that also. But actually, it is not. To get your peace within, to get to your witness state, and to feel your vibrations all right, and to be in the centre, all the time ascending, is the real blessing. Because with that, you get everything else. The completion is only possible when you have the complete joy bubbling within yourself.
After all, everything is just a means to achieve joy, to feel the joy. It is not the end. If it was, those people who have money, those people who have good health, those people who have all the success, so-called, with them, they should have had been happy and peaceful, but they are not, they are suffering, they are suffering too much, and they are, in a way, destroying themselves, day by day, because they hate their lives, they can’t bear it. They cannot understand why they are on this Earth.
So, all these blessings that come to you, all these changes that come to you, all these new venues that open to you, one has to know that it is for your benevolence, everything for your benevolence, and your benevolence is your ascent, nothing else but your ascent. The rest of it is all useless and fruitless.
Once you understand that this is what you have to achieve in life, that is what you have to enjoy, then it works out. But in Sahaja Yoga as you see, it’s compassion and love. It is not so much restrictions. You are left to yourself to develop yourself. Is your Spirit which has to guide you. There’s no coaxing or correction going on all the time. But it is left to you to understand yourself, to see for yourself, and work it out.
But one of the criteria should be that, “What have I done for Sahaja Yoga? Now what have I done for Mother?” These two things are very important to understand.
Whatever small thing I could do for Sahaja Yoga is important because if you are intelligent, you can see that this is the greatest thing you have to do – is to work for God. This is the most important thing so far human beings have indulged into, is the highest type of enterprise that human beings have ever had a chance to indulge into – and what a chance it is too!  You may say that, “Mother we are mediocres, we are no good, we are useless,” but you are chosen. You are the one chosen so there must be something about you. You might not have seen that part within yourself which is going to work out this great work of God.
So, you have to locate and find out: “Why am I selected for Sahaja Yoga? What can I do in Sahaja Yoga? What can I work it out in Sahaja Yoga?” This should be a constant reminder to you that, “I have been chosen for Sahaja Yoga. I want to take full advantage of Sahaja Yoga.” Supposing somebody doesn’t have money, he expects that Sahaja Yoga should give money, must give jobs, must give this, must give that, must have children, must give good health, all that. Expectations are all right. But “What have I done for Sahaja Yoga?” This is another point of introspection. Very important to see that we have to do something for Sahaja Yoga.
It’s not money, it’s not work, it’s not thinking, it’s not any kind of a support. But one of them, the most important thing is, how many people you have given Realisation to? You have to count. How many people you have been able to give Realisation to? How many people you have talked [to] about Sahaja Yoga? You may think that you give Realisation to some people, they come, they disappear – doesn’t matter. They will ultimately come to you. Today you try on some, they’ll be lost. Again tomorrow. You have to relentlessly work for it.
As you know I’ve worked very hard in UK. My coming to UK itself was all predetermined. There was a need for me to come here, to make the heart work better. But heart is lethargic, you know that, and lethargic heart gets all kinds of problems. But all these years I have been working, every year, whatever time I could give for Sahaja Yogis, for their problems, for Sahaja Yoga, for their minutest problem, for any kind of help they needed, every sort, I have tried to work it out. Directly, indirectly, you are all blessed. Still, what about you people who are now yogis? You are saints.
You must see a photograph that I have, very interesting photograph, where you are all certified saints! [Laughter.] Have you seen that photograph? Not yet? You better see it, let’s have it! The photograph is in my box, I think, yes. You are all certified saints! By the Divine, not by any cardinal or by any pope. So, what are all these saints doing? One saint which is certified by pope, who is artificially certified, is such a big thing, you know. What about you, who have been certified by God Almighty? You are still busy with your work, you are still busy with your little, little things, you are still busy with your small lives and small families.
For a saint, it’s said in Sanskrit, “udara charitanam tu vasudhaiva ku Tumbakam,” – for a person who is of a generous nature, means a person who is a saint, the whole world is his own family”. Are you still only worried about your own family? Then you are not yet aware of your saintliness. And a saint doesn’t only worry about his own wife, about his own child, about his own house, he worries about the whole world.
Now, as Sahaja Yogis, you are a powerful entities. You are very powerful people. We have got problems in the whole world. You know that very well. It’s not necessary you have to be great intellectuals, or you have to be people who are some sort of politicians, or something. But you must be on the lookout for the problems which are troubling this world. You have to be. You cannot live in your own world, that you are a saint, “Now I am in nirananda!” that’s not possible. You can’t just be in niranand. [Laughter.] You have to know that you have to live in this world, and you have to know all the problems of this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems that, “Mother how will I be able to do this and how will I be able to do that?” But you have to worry about the whole world. You have to think, what’s happening in the world, what are the problems of the world. You are responsible for that.
Not only that, but you have to pray. In your prayers you have to say, “Mother solve this problem.” Collectively, individually, you have to take your attention from yourself, from your smaller life, to a much wider thing –  then you are a saint. And you have to think that it is your duty to ask for Divine help, that all these problems should be solved. This is your job for which you are selected.
Your asking is going to work out because as you know, I am desire-less. You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The protection, the affection, the compassion of Mother is with you. But you have to look after this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with a very limited areas, and with a very limited ways.
Like now the British think, British are here, all right. “UK problems are our problems.” No! Your problems extend to all the places wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them. Now we are having, say, problems in Australia. And there’s somebody who is very troublesome. So, you have to see to it that you beat that person with shoes and put that right. Your leader has to tell you whom to beat with the shoes. And work it out, whether it is in Australia, whether it is in America, whether it is in India, anywhere you see that there’s a problem on Sahaja Yoga, there’s an assault on Sahaja Yoga, all of you should put your attention to it and work it out.
Then there are general problems as you see. You see, we see that America is now becoming idiotic, or whatever you may say, so you have to put your attention to America. You have to stretch your attention outside, not inside – just worried about yourself, about your family, about your house, about your children. As soon as you spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in the house, in the smaller circle they are solved. You have to pay attention outside!
Now these days there are televisions, where, first, we had said, “Don’t see any televisions!“, because there was no use seeing television by Sahaja Yogis. When they saw the television they only got caught up. But now there are important things that are happening which you can see for yourself. You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see for yourself where you have to put your attention.
You should become aware of your personality, it’s not a personality that can be completely involved into a very small area. Your personality, as such, should get involved into all the problems of the universe, all the problems there are. And you’ll be amazed that everything can work out in a very collective way. And at this stage, when you are, you can see for yourself now, all the Sahaja Yogis have got vibrations on top of their heads. Would you like to have a look, all of you? Just see! All of you, sitting in Ganapatipule.
So, stretch out your vibrations, stretch out your attentions. And you’ll be amazed that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished. Now have a look. Let the children see first of all. Just see. You all have vibrations on top of your head.
Please, pick-up the child who is crying, you see, just.What’s the matter? She’s tired, I think. Let’s sit down. Sit down, sit down, come along, sit down.Stand on. Hello, Stunia? Please, put your face this side. Hello? Ah, sit down.Now, sit down all of you, be sensible. Ah!Let them grow, I tell you I’m just waiting for them to grow! [Laughter]
So, the attitude toward ourselves should be – to be aware of our own glory, of our own position, to know that we are saints, we have reached a stage where we are at the highest, and that, now, we have become the light and we have to give light to others.
If you see, in the Bible, Christ has said something which is very important that, “You don’t put the light under the table”. That’s what it is. You have to put the light on a pedestal. And that’s what it is that you have to put your light on the citadel, at a very highest point to give light to others. And this is working both ways if you start understanding what you are, what you have to be aware of, what is your situation, what is your powers, what you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, what is the debt you have towards Sahaja Yoga, and what you have to give for Sahaja Yoga. How Sahaja Yoga has made you so capable, so good, so nice. Are you righteous enough? Are you behaving properly? Are you doing all the rightful things, which are necessary? Because it is only you who can do it. You are the people with a very, very special energies and special contacts with the spiritual life, and if you start behaving like all other mundane, nonsensical people, limiting yourself to your family, your children, your nonsensical previous lives, you’ll be lost. Lost to yourself and lost to everyone.
The problems are much more than what you know about. That is the understanding you have to reach, that Mother has made us yogis. We are saints. And we have to show to the world the right path. She has told us that we are the light and we have to show to people which way to go, how to go further. Instead of that everybody seems to be a problem, seems to be in a very small little whirlpool, going round and round and round. How can that be?
I’ve told you many a times, look at these false gurus. They have no vibrations, they don’t know anything about Kundalini, nothing about Sahaja Yoga. But how much they are doing! While what are we doing? We’re struggling still with ourselves and with our problems, with our own ideas, with our very small-mindedness and chicken-heartedness. Now it is for you to understand. It is for you to decide about yourself. It is your own desire, it is your own bigness, your own magnanimity, which has to come forward. To see for yourself what you are capable of, what you can do. It’s very easy for people to say that, “Oh Mother, it’s too much. I can’t do anything about it.” Or somebody to say that, “Mother, I’m busy with my family”. Or somebody to say, “I’m busy with my children.” You have come to Sahaja Yoga for that? I have given you Realisation for that? All these blessings have come to you for that?
So, the consolidation that you have to do is very important. You can see it clearly that’s why we could not have any public programs, because we really need consolidation in UK. Though I have lived in UK for so many years, people take me for granted here. Because I am here, because I am staying here, they think if we go to the airport, finished! We have done all the “Hajj” [pilgrimage], everything. “We’ve been to the airport, we’ve seen Mother, finished!”
What’s the use of seeing Me? What have I given you? Is your light spreading? How many people have got Realisation from you? Just find out, how many people have learned Sahaja Yoga from you, or from your lives, or from your wisdom, or from your behaviour. That is the way, that is the criteria. It’s not that, “All right, I have sent Mother Her money for Her travel.” That’s not sufficient.
At my age, from India, if you see any lady at my age, she walks with a stick, she can’t climb even one step. Indian women can’t, because of the heat that they have suffered. But I’m traveling, you know how I’m traveling, how much I am doing. What about my family? I deprive them of my company, I deprive my husband of my company, everybody is just without Me. I am traveling, traveling every day, you know that very well, and I’m working so very hard. Sometimes I sleep at two o’clock, sometimes at three o’clock. This time Harsh was with Me, and I saw him, he was fagged out!
So, I was saying you people do only relay race. I am in Australia, all right – Australians are working. Then I’m in Austria – then Austrians are working, then they are having a nice time there! I’m in UK, all right, little bit in UK, little work done. Then they all sit down nicely, enjoy. What about Me? I am having a marathon!
In the same way you have to feel, “After all, what is my gain in it?” What do I gain out of it? I gain something: I have brought my children back to normal conditions, I have taken them to the Kingdom of God. You have to do the same. You have to take them to the Kingdom of God. But if you, yourself, are involved into your own mayas, you’ll be everyday going down and down and down and down. I may shout, I may say anything, it will not go into your heads, it will never click with you. You’ll be all stranded wherever you are, because you don’t want to see.
For that, I would say, you have one advantage, especially in UK. You are all very intelligent people. You have intelligence, no doubt, you are not idiots like Americans. You are intelligent. This intelligence became cunningness once upon a time, and now you are tired of your cunning. Indians have learned the cunning from you, they have become really very cunning. But you are tired of your cunningness, so now you are tired, fed up, fagged out, and lethargic. But with your intelligence you can understand that this is such an important work our Mother is doing.
You’ll go down in the history! Every word you say, everything you say, every way you behave, everything is going to go down in the history! Not how many children you produced, or what sort of a wife you have, but what you did for Sahaja Yoga. Remember that. History is going to record everything, whatever you have done and whatever you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga.
It’s not showing off. It’s not just a demonstration. It’s not talking big. It’s nothing of the kind. It’s actually, really, totally what you have achieved, is the point, will be recorded. At least God knows hypocrisy, and God knows bombastic temperaments. It’s God who knows where you are, and what you are up to. You cannot befool God – [that’s] one thing you must realise. But when you are befooling God, you are befooling your Self, your Spirit, your Realisation, your own ascent! So, we have to be careful.
As a Mother, I would say try to be introspecting yourself very carefully – what have we done for Sahaja Yoga? What have we done for other people who are drifting? What has been our behaviour towards other Sahaja Yogis? How much peace and love and compassion we have given to others? How much understanding and tolerance we have shown to others?
If somebody gets here a little more money, he becomes so bombastic, he becomes so aggressive, he becomes so rude. I can’t believe it! How can money lure you into these vices? You are not ordinary people, you are the saints whose feet were washed by the River Ganges. Try to understand your glory. Try to understand your own powers, your own position as saintly people, Sahaja Yogis, which are above all the saints because you know how to give Realisation, you know everything about Kundalini, you know everything about Realisation. How many people knew about it?
Otherwise, I’ll start thinking I have given all this knowledge to some bunch of fools who do not know what is the value. As Christ has said, “Don’t throw pearls before the swines.” But I don’t think I have done that mistake. I cannot believe I have done that mistake, that I have thrown pearls before swines. I have not done it.
But, it is for you to decide where you stand, in what category. It is so obvious that it’s a very precarious time we are passing through. It’s very important [that] we have to fight it out. It’s much more than any wars you have fought. It’s much more than any struggle human beings ever had. It’s such a horrible world that is being created, and we have to transform it. It’s a tremendous task. For that you have to work out in a very sincere and a innate manner.
And I’m sure one day will come that in the history of this world Sahaja Yogis will have their names written with golden letters. I am sure this will work out. I am sure this has to work out, and that you all have to achieve it, collectively, with one mind, with one heart, “What should I sacrifice? What should I do? How should I help? What is my contribution?” I wish I could see those days in my lifetime.
So today is the day when we have to introspect. So, should we go into meditation, all of us? Please close your eyes. All of you close your eyes. Now we all will do the meditation the way we have been doing in the halls wherever we had public programmes.
So, the first you have to put your hand on your heart. We’ll work on the left-hand side, and the left hand towards Me.
Now, first of all, you put your hand on your heart. In the heart resides Shiva. He’s the Spirit. So, you have to thank your Spirit that it has brought light to your attention, because you are a saint and the light that has come in your heart has to enlighten the whole world.
So, please, now in your heart, you pray that, “Let this light of my love of the Divine spread to the whole world.”
With all sincerity and understanding that you are connected with the Divine and whatever you desire will happen with full confidence in yourself.
Now put your right hand in the upper part of your abdomen, on the left-hand side, on the upper part of your stomach on the left-hand side. And now, here is the centre of your dharma. Here you have to pray that, “Let Vishwa Nirmal Dharma spread in the whole world. Let people see the light through our dharmic life, through our righteousness. Let people see them and accept the Vishwa Nirmal Dharm by which they get enlightenment and a benevolent higher life and a desire to ascend.”
Now take your right hand in the lower portion of your abdomen of the stomach on the left-hand side. Press it. Now this is the centre of Pure Knowledge. Here you have to say, as Sahaja Yogis, that, “Our Mother has given us the full idea how the Divine works. She has given us all the mantras and all the Pure Knowledge that we could bear and understand. Let me fully be knowledgeable about that, all of us.” I have seen if the man is a leader, the wife doesn’t know a word about Sahaja Yoga. If the woman knows about Sahaja Yoga, the husband doesn’t know anything about it.
“Let me be proficient and an expert in this knowledge so that I can give Realisation to people, make them understand what is Divine law, what is Kundalini, and what are the chakras. Let my attention be more on Sahaja Yoga than all these mundane things.”
Now put your right hand in the upper part of your abdomen. Close your eyes. Now here on the left-hand side, press it. Now here, “Mother has given me the Spirit, and I have my own guru which is the Spirit. I am master of my own. Let there be no abandonment. Let there be dignity in my character. Let there be generosity in my behaviour. Let there be compassion and love for other Sahaja Yogis. Let me not show off, but have a deep, deep knowledge about God’s love and His doings so that when people come to me, I should be able to tell them about Sahaja Yoga and give them this great knowledge with humility and love.”
Now raise your right hand on your heart. Here you have to thank God that you have felt the ocean of joy and you have felt the ocean of forgiveness and the capacity to forgive, as our Mother has, which we have seen is so tremendous. “Let my heart expand and encompass the whole universe. And my love should resound the name of God. The heart, every moment, should express the beauty of God’s love.”
Now take your right hand in the Vishuddhi that is on the left Vishuddhi, between the neck and the shoulder in the corner. “I will not indulge into the falsehood of guilt because I know it is falsehood. I will not escape my faults but face them and eradicate them. I will not try to find faults with others, but in my own knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, let me remove their faults.”
We have so many ways, secretly [that] we can remove the faults of others. “Let my collectivity become so great that the whole Sahaja Yoga race is my own family, my own children, my home, my everything. Let me get that feeling completely, innately built within myself that I am a part and a parcel of the whole, because we all have one Mother. And let my concern go to the whole world, to know what are their problems and how can [I], through my true desire power, solve that. Let me feel the problems of the world in my heart, and innately to remove all of them from the basis of which they are, from the basis from which they are generated. Let me go to the principles of all these problems and try to remove them through my Sahaja Yoga powers, through my saintly powers.”
Now put your right hand on your forehead, across. Now here you have to say, first of all, “I have to forgive all those who have not come in Sahaja Yoga, those who are on the periphery, who come and go, who jump in and jump out. But, first of all and foremost, I have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis, because they are all better than me. I’m the one, who tries to find faults with them, but I am at the lowest ebb and I have to forgive them because I must know that I still have to go very further. I’m still much less. I have to improve myself.”
This humility has to come within us, so you have to say here, “Let the humility in my heart, in a true sense, not hypocritical, work out this feeling of forgiveness, so that I bow to reality, to God, and to Sahaja Yoga.”
Now you have to put back your hand on the backside of your head and push back your head here. And you have to say here, “Oh Mother, whatever wrong we have done to You so far, and whatever wrong goes in our minds, and whatever smallness we have shown to You, whatever way we have troubled You and challenged You, please forgive us.”
You have to ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence you should know what I am. I don’t have to tell you again and again.
Now at Sahasrara, you have to thank Me. At Sahasrara, put your hand, move it seven times, and thank Me seven times.
“Mother thank You very much for the Realisation. And Mother, thank You very much for making us understand how great we are. And thank You very much for bringing all the blessings of the Divine. And thank You very much for raising us higher, much higher, than from where we were. And also thank You very much for sustaining us and for helping us to improve ourselves and correct ourselves.
And thank You very much ultimately that Mother, You have come on this earth, taken Your birth, and working so hard for us, for all of us.”Press it hard and move it hard.
[Shri Mataji speak to children now]
Kaliutra, Kaliutra…get down. Get down. Sit down with them.
Now take down your hands. Heads are all very hot.So now let us give ourselves a nice bandhan. In the bandhan of Mother let us move our left to the right. One, nicely, understanding what you are, what are your auras. Now again, second one. Now the third one. Now the fourth one. Now the fifth. Now the sixth one. And now the seventh.Now raise your Kundalini. Raise your Kundalini, slowly, very slowly. Raise it, first time you have to do it very slowly. Now push back your heads, and give it a knot, one knot.Second one, let’s do it, very slowly and knowing what you are, you’re a saint. Do it, properly, properly, do it properly, not in a haste. Take it to your head, push back your head and give it two knots there, one and two.Now let’s do the other one. Again, the third one we have to give three knots. Very slowly do it, very slowly. Now, do it properly. Now push back your head, now give it the third one, three times.Now see your vibrations.See your vibrations like this.All the children, see your vibrations like this. Put your hand [straight]All right? Good.The steps [unsure] done it.Beautiful. I am getting vibrations from you.May God bless you!Thank you very much.
Now could you show that photograph round to see for people how they are saints. Where’s the photograph, who has got the photographs? Yes, show it round, let people see, how you are all certified Yogis.So now I think you should have your dinner and after dinner we’ll have some music program. All right, good idea?