22 August 1982
Shri Ganesha Puja: Innocence & Joy
House of Charles and Magda Mathys, Troinex (Switzerland)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Shri Ganesha Puja. Troinex, (Geneva, Switzerland), 22 August 1982.
Call them, call the people. You can move in front and can sit at the back.
Gregoire asks if there should be an explanation of Puja as there are some newcomers.
Shri Mataji: Is there somebody here who can translate? You need two persons. You can sit here.
Gregoire: I can also translate in Italian
Shri Mataji: But has he not come? He should come for the puja, you know.Everybody should come in. When they are all here, then I will start. Now, come forward. There’s room here. Those who can sit on the ground can sit in front. Please come. (Mother aside to yogini) You like it? Colour is all right?Where is, who else will translate?All right, you can come. You do it in French and she can do it in Italian. Arnaut has not come?You are there. Who else?The children can sit in front – let the children sit in front. All the four children could come later on, when you start the puja.Has everybody come? Ah! Robotic motor-cars! Great!… Exactly, that’s what it is! Who is outside?
[Here starts the transcript of the talk]
All right. First, I would like to tell you about the meaning of Puja. There are two aspects. (5.02) One is the aspect that you have got your own deities within yourself. And these deities are to be awakened within you. Deities are the different aspects of one God. So, on one side you have the Deities, means the aspects of God, which are all the time awakened. On the other side you have your own Deities, which are sometimes awakened, sometimes half-awakened, sometimes sleeping and sometimes sick. So you have to use two methods: one to please the Deities of God, and to ask them to bless your Deities, or to ask them to awaken your Deities. So by doing the puja, means when you offer anything that you have got to offer, anything that you offer is – say, flowers, if you want to offer flower to God, you don’t have to speak anything, you have to just offer, that “this is for You.” Anybody can understand offering, for that you don’t have to have even a tongue. Even if a blind man is there, if he wants to give you something, he can just give you like this. And that expression is sufficient for anybody to be convinced that he can offer it. You don’t have to say anything about it. So now, when you offer a flower to God, even if you don’t say a mantra it is offered – all right, it’s given. But whether it is accepted or not is a problem. But now, when you are a realized soul and you offer anything, it is acceptable to God even if you don’t say anything. But what about you getting any reward out of it? After realization when you offer anything to God, He accepts, because it’s coming from a realized soul, so He accepts.
Now, how do we get blessed by Him, by giving a flower to God? Now if you don’t say anything about it, you just offer a flower, then you might be rewarded with many flowers automatically in life. Or you may be, whatever material things you offer, you may be blessed materially. Then in a subtler way if you say something, as you say for offering somebody that humble way of saying that “I’ll be happy if You would accept this,” will be even subtler results of that maybe, which could be much wider, maybe much deeper. Now, you do something symbolic which is very, the essence, the principle of something. Like flowers are the – they represent the principle of the Mother Earth. Now, so the symbolism of all the things that we can offer to God has been meditated upon, and has been found out. So, they use five things called as panchamruta, as we have here. Because if you have hit the principle, then you have really hit the whole, isn’t it? Because spiritual well-being is a total well-being. It’s not just partly that your material well-being or your physical well-being, or your emotional well-being, or your mental well-being. It’s a total one, completely balanced into totality. (16.22)
Now when you offer these other things like the, we call them akshadas, what do you call? Turmeric. Turmeric rice, you see, this yellow thing, you see. When you offer this, you know, the yellow colour is that of the Swadishthana Chakra. And rice is very dear to all the gods. Now there’s a trick in it, because it’s a human trick. Gods are fond of rice. So, they put turmeric on it, means that “We offer to You a rice which is yellow-coloured” – means, “You should give us blessings of our creativity.” When you eat it, more creativity will flow and we’ll be blessed by that deity – it’s a trick. The whole thing of puja is the trick of human saints, you, how to trick God to give more blessings! But whatever God likes, it has to be auspicious and holy. So ultimately it works out for the holiness of saints and their simple hearts.
Now, the Puja cannot be done by a person who is not a realized soul. A person who preaches also has to be a realized soul, the one who does Namaz has to be a realized soul, the one who prays has to be a realized soul. So, all the utensils that are used are to be worshipped in a way that they are to be holy things, they are to be respected things. You cannot use anything, say the one you are using in the bathroom and you use the same thing for the puja, is absurd.
Three things are very important, is a ghatah, means (water pot) the vessel, vessel that contains the kundalini, the vessel that contains the primordial desire within us to get to God, is first to be worshipped, our desire. Is the ghatah, is the one made here. And on top is called as a Shriphala. Shriphala means this also has got water in it, if you see, the coconut represents the same thing. Now in the subtler form it is the water of all the rivers of the world. And the coconut is the water of all the oceans. The water from the ocean or sea rises through the tree-trunk of the coconut, and becomes the sweet water in the coconut. It’s a symbolic thing. So, this is the vessel called ghatah-puja, this is the ghatah-puja.
Now, I don’t want to go to details today, because we have to talk about Ganesha. The same is – now that is water, all right.
Then we have to worship Ghanta (bell) and Shankha (shell). These are two representing the sound. Shell. [Shri Mataji repeats it for the French translator who did not remember]
Actually, the Shankha represents the ether. Then we have the Deepa, means what? It’s the light, represents the light element, called as tejas (flame).
Normally also to the Goddess they also give Her a fan, which represents the air element.
So, this is how all the five elements are pleased beforehand, using them. So, the essences of these or the causal essences of these five elements should be pleased at this time, should be supporting the puja.
Now there are also all kinds of other things, like your family deities, you might be worshipping in your family some deities. They should not be also at this time upsetting the puja; or maybe the forefathers who are dead. All these things are to be quietened, so that they should be told that this is a puja like this, and you do not disturb us at this time. Means even thoughts should not come, their thoughts or their – any disturbances. So, everything is to be first made into peace.
Now this is the one aspect I have told you in short, because it’s a very long thing. If I have to speak about it I’ll have to speak at least three times, and with three hours each time, still it may not be finished.
Now we come to the second aspect, which question I asked you “What do you, how do you get benefited by it?” So apart from this technique, to have the best effect of the blessings or the best flow of the Grace within us, we say mantras. The sound of mantras, the sound, the sound echo into the being of God. And they are re-echoed on our chakras, and then the chakras start opening more. So, the flow of the Grace of God is received. But only a realized soul should chant a mantra. Because without connection, how will it reach God? It is a vicious circle. Now one may say that “Mother, you cannot get realization unless and until you get the Grace of God. And the chakras won’t open by a person who is not a realized soul. And without opening the chakras you cannot get realization.” That’s how the play of the Mother comes in, and of all the saints, like you. I would say the Sahaja yogis have to break this vicious circle. You have to raise the kundalini yourself. Once you raise the kundalini, the kundalini opens the chakras a little bit, because you have given your vibrations to the chakras. So, once she knows there is a Sahaja yogi standing behind the seeker, she rises. She knows you are her brothers and sisters, and that you belong to the same family as she does. She knows the land where she has to grow, so she can feel that, and then she rises in her dignity. That’s how she breaks this vicious circle.That’s why in the beginning we don’t tell them about the mantras, because in the mantras you have to accept Me as the Deity.
In this advent of Mine it is made compulsory that you have to recognize Me. Because this is very precarious, the Resurrection Time we can call it, or the time of your Last Judgment. First the realization has to be given without any recognition. But not to those who are denying or insulting Me. Under any circumstances they cannot get realization, whatever you may try. Even after realization if people start thinking against Me, vibrations will stop, because of Sahasrara. And the heart has to be completely in unison with Me, otherwise Sahasrara is closed.
Now those people who are simple, who are full of open heart, such people understand Me very well and they just put Me in their hearts. After realization, after going through the understanding of Sahaja Yoga, through their mental activity, also the intellectuals understand Me and recognize Me in a little circuitous way. After the puja, when they receive the blessings, a very blissful state they achieve, then they realize the value of puja also – afterwards.
Now in India, where the puja system has been traditionally coming and has been maintained quite a lot, they understand it without any mental processes. But when they meet somebody, an intellectual, who has become a Sahaja yogi, they can’t understand them. They don’t want to listen about it, the whole rigmarole of the whole movement of the brain. And some of them who try, a little westernized, they try, they develop an inferiority complex, and they go to the left side. But there is no need to understand it with mental, I mean, to all the time analysing through your mental process, and then to understand everything, and then become Sahaja yogis with the heart open. This is rather very circuitous. But what to do? They have gone that way, so they have to come that way. Because even if they become Sahaja yogis, they start questioning and thinking about it, and worrying about it. So, the false people just mesmerize them and take advantage of that mesmerism. So, one should not feel bad. If you feel like analysing, you should go ahead with it, because I cannot stop your speed, I’m not going to mesmerize you.
In Sahaja Yoga the freedom is to be respected. But we do not allow people to come for puja who have not achieved a certain amount of understanding mentally of Sahaja Yoga – from the Western people, not in India, but here there is a restriction. Because supposing in India I do not explain to them, they don’t want to know. They know that they’ll get vibrations. They already know about vibrations, so I don’t have to tell them “You will get more vibrations.” If they get more vibrations, they know I am the Shakti, that’s all, I don’t have to explain it. Like as you can make out which is the best wine, they can make out who is the real person. They know the taste of it. Now, once in a puja I had about six thousand people that touched My Feet. So, I said, “In a puja now, please don’t have – the people need not touch My Feet.” I said it. But they thought it was Dhumal who suggested, so they all got after his life. They said, “You only want to take all the blessings from Mother’s Feet, and you didn’t want us to take it”, and they got after him.
Another thing is, you see, in the West I never used to make the panchamruta with My Feet but with My Hands, because here people would think that that’s a dirty thing feet, and we should not have of the feet. But actually, the Feet are very powerful, and they can never be dirty.
Like the River Ganges has vibrations. If you have the water of Ganges you will see that it will never be dirtied. On the contrary, whatever are inside that because it’s never sort of very kept clean, whatever dirt has gone into it, it settles down and doesn’t dirty the thing at all. It’s very clean water, all the time vibrating.
So, one must understand whatever is pure, which is responsible for purity, which is the source of purity, can cleanse any impurity. So how it can be impure? But with the brain if you think it, it’s so limited. You cannot think of something which is just the embodiment of purity.
This is the point we have come now, where I think I should talk about the Absolute. That is Shri Ganesha. Today is His Puja. It’s a very great thing that this Puja we are doing in Geneva in Switzerland. Geneva is the right Heart, I think. The way it is against right Heart. Everybody’s life is a tragedy, like Rama in Ayodhya. And that is why it is very important that Shri Ganesha should be worshipped here.
Now Shri Ganesha, as you know, is the embodiment of innocence. Now Ganesha’s colour is red or orangish. Because the child, when it is conceived as a foetus, the first colour it sees is orange of the red wall of the mother’s womb, of the blood. In Sahaja Yoga, now you must have learnt that every action has a reaction, which acts. The colour of the original, we can say the primordial Ganesha is just of the clay, because He is made out of Mother Earth. Now when the Gauri, the Mother of Ganesha created Him to protect Her chastity while She was having Her bath, She coloured Him red, because everybody could see that there’s somebody sitting there to protect Her. So, when you see the red colour around you as a foetus, then you absorb that colour, and your Ganesha gets coloured with the red in the same beautiful manner. Just it has a reaction of that getting red and it acts, means red colour of a Ganesha, the one who has a red colour of a Ganesha, frightens others. They know there is Ganesha sitting there, a pure, chaste, personality with all the fieriness of the Ganesha is there. (57.30)
Now this Ganesha when He is in a childhood, as you see, when the child is born, the children are extremely protective or fiery, you can say, about anybody touching their innocence. When they are absolutely young, they are not even aware of it. But slightly, as soon as they start growing, they become very aware and they don’t like their clothes to be taken out in the presence of others. They become very shy of their innocence. I mean, not shy, shyness is not – in the sense of their nudity, very shy of their nudity, so that their innocence should not be attacked. If their innocence is not attacked and if they are pure, if they see a nude woman, they’ll close their eyes. (They would not like to see a nude woman, or a nude man. (1:00:47) So this is an innate understanding, an intuitive understanding that it is important that they must preserve their innocence.
Now, what is the innocence within us? What does it do to us? As it is, already I’ve told you that it gives us wisdom. All kinds of stupidity we do with our ego; as I was describing the president and so many others at that age and at that height of their positions, it is because the Ganesha is missing completely.
We went to Brighton where they have a beach, sort of a – beach where you can do nude things. And My maid, she is innocent, we went there, and she couldn’t understand. She asked Me, “But why are they doing it?” But as you will find that in the West it’s hard to find a really a wise person. You can say that the people are over-educated and they are very well-equipped with other understanding of the material side of life and all that. But as far as the wisdom is concerned, one can get shocked the way they are. I mean, just don’t understand, what’s the wisdom behind it?
Because all their wisdom has become nothing but sex. They always think of sex, and they always want to understand all the nonsense of the sex. If you start thinking about your sex, naturally your innocence will be destroyed right there. Because you cannot use your intelligence for sex. I don’t understand the wisdom how you can rationalize sex. This is such a spontaneous thing. And by thinking about it, are you going to enjoy it? How can you? It would be like saying that we can transform a flower into a fruit by thinking. And the more serious thing is this way, that supposing you say “I can” – of course you can never think like, I hope so, that you can transform a flower into a fruit, I hope so. But some people can think that “I can shift,” say for example, “this thing from here to here, with my mind I can shift it.” Or materialize things. So, you know that you can do it, you believe that you can do it, because some people have done it. But as Sahaja yogis you know it is done by bhoots, by dead spirits, they do it for you, because they are busybodies trying to help you.
Now, same thing happens as far as sex is concerned. When you want to have sex through your intellectual pursuits, you get only the bhoots to do that for you. Because when you project too much of your mind, then it goes into areas where you catch them. And they are sometimes very sly, sometimes depraved, sometimes aggressive, all kinds of things you gather, and the result is that the sex becomes a nonsense. So many depraved people are satisfied once they attack you, and you have either a very excited sex, that even if you rape hundred women you are not satisfied, or you’ll have an impotency of the worst type. So, I mean, you are always left dissatisfied. All such people when they die, they also become the same bhoots, waiting for some sex fellow to come around, and jump on him.
Innocent persons also may not have any sex activity for many years, even after marriage, because they are so innocent. It could be so also with very childlike people. But here it’s a science which is taught from childhood – just imagine. What is the need? Do the animals have to learn anything from childhood, about sex? They produce children too. (You have said?) So, the asceticism is not what I am teaching.
First, the innocence is protective and red, say till the age of, at the most, fifty years. Then gradually, if the person is properly maturing, not the stupid people but who are maturing properly, after fifty it starts becoming orange. It becomes orange. Means when you get married this process of this redness goes away and it becomes, starts becoming orange. That means the protection part is over. Means, before marriage the virginity has to be preserved. Till you meet the person with whom you are to be married, that redness is the protection of that virginity. Then, when you are married, the protection part of it is not needed. But it has to be only towards one person – that’s your husband or wife. Then the proper maturity takes place, and by the time you are about fifty years of age it becomes orange – means there’s detachment. You don’t feel like having any more sex life. There’s no need also. And then you develop a, what you call a proper matured innocence which is, can be compared with a properly baked earthenware.
So old age is the really the golden age, where a person has got that wisdom shining through the complete behaviour of that person. But why – again, why to have this maturity, why to have this innocence? Again, because you are rational people, so one can ask the question, why?Innocence is the way you really give fun to others, create the fun part of it. The fun is created only through innocence. And innocence is the only way you can really emit also the fun. Imagine this world without any fun, what would happen? But people are very much confused with the fun and the pleasures. The pleasure is nice to begin with, and horrible to end with. But fun is a treasure. Anything that is full of fun you remember all your life, you can tell others, it’s such an embodiment of fun-creation.
Gavin: There’s no word in French for “fun”! (Laughter)
Shri Mataji: Can you imagine this French language is diplomatic – no word for “fun”!
Yogini translating into it: Amusement, but it is not as strong as ‘fun’.
Shri Mataji: Fun is so strong!
Shri Mataji: Like I’ll give you a simple example how these children create fun out of something. They make everything into a fun. And now, even when they speak or they say things also they create such a fun out of it. The other day My youngest grandchild, that’s Anupama – she’s hardly now six years – was playing and she went up to the top of the house somewhere, and then we heard a big thud. And My daughter, she’s a very frantic mother, always worried about her children’s well-being. Fun, eh? And she couldn’t even walk, her legs became heavy with worry, and she was walking to find out what’s coming down now. So, she shouted for the child and the child came running down, she was quite all right. So, she shouted at her, and she said, “What happened? Where did you go? Why did you go up?” She just started shouting at her. So, this child looked at her, quite puzzled, and she waited for her to stop her shouting. And she said very quietly, “I’ve not come all the way from Riadh here to die!” So, there are so many things which you write it down, it’s all fun, and natural fun that they have out of everything. We can have now here all the children who are here, there’s so many things you can write them down, how beautiful things they are doing, and how there is a twinkle of a mischief in their eyes, that they want to create a fun out of everything. Fun is joy-giving, it gives you joy. It’s not just a sort of a coaxing in any way, or a hurting in any way or anything sadistic in it, but it’s just a blossoming.
Shri Mataji: Do you understand fun?
Gregoire: Mother, do You think it’s possible if we don’t translate any more, because it takes too much time for that?
Shri Mataji: I think so
Gregoire: English words, we’ll tell them at the end, also the few who don’t understand English, we’ll explain them at the end, what You have said.
Shri Mataji: All right for you? Because I’m coming to an end, Gregoire, as I finish at twelve-thirty, let’s do it for today. But the next time I think it’s a better idea to translate it later. Just little bit I’ll translate more, because we are coming to an end, and that’s why it’s taken so much time, otherwise it will be one-third of the time.
Shri Mataji: Yes, just translate this part what I’ve said is, that fun is nothing but blossoming. It doesn’t tease anyone, it doesn’t hurt anyone, doesn’t trouble anyone but just blossoms, the whole thing, into fragrance. It is the Divine’s trick. It has something higher than that also, that if you are innocent, you really can feel the joy. So, an innocent person can feel the joy of something which a very serious and a very rational person may never see. An innocent person may laugh loudly at a thing, to other people it may not be something funny. So, the fun-creation is not a dubious thing, it’s a very straightforward, simple, a spontaneous blossoming.
Now in Geneva, people are really very serious about everything. More so in Switzerland. So much so that they commit suicide as a result. Because you are money-oriented, and you are also a sort of a, take up a role of helping the whole world. Means you are very ego-oriented, because you want to help the whole world. Who are you to help? And thirdly, you have a stupid military here which is not needed.
Yogini: Mother, excuse me, you know that yesterday it was in the newspapers that there had been again a military airplane which crashed in Switzerland, with two deaths. With Your photo next to it.
Shri Mataji: It’s too much to blame Me. (Laughter)
(Yogi speaks about helicopter and new models of planes…)Yogini: He says, it was during a show where they wanted to show off all the military strength.
Shri Mataji: That’s the fun (Laughter) – that’s the fun. So, everybody is happy about it, that this is the one how you see is funny.Now, to help the fun more, we have got Hanumana. He helps the fun part of Shri Ganesh. Like Ganesha who plays tricks of fun on the people who are left-sided, He plays His tricks on the right-sided people. Like there is a person who was crying too much, her husband is dead, “Now what to do? I am finished,” this thing, that thing – and suddenly she sees her husband walking in the room! But this only He does to the people who are innocent. But to the cunning, He punishes. He’ll go on pouring all kinds of miseries, one more than the other, and He’ll say, “Now cry more, and cry more. You want to cry? All right, have it more, and have it more.” And Hanumana on His side – say for example, when Lakshmana was sick and He had to get some medicine from one big mountain, He brought the whole mountain. Because He said, “I had no time to find it, so better find it now,” and brought the whole mountain. He too is the same style, can be very destructive when it comes to egoistical people, like Ravana – whole Lanka he burnt.
If Ganesha is painted red, (Hanumana) He is painted orange. And as Ganesha has to settle down permanently in one place, He uses Saint Michael to run up and down the left side. While Hanumana can run up and down, He need not settle down at a place. But though He is a settled Deity, Sthita, is the one who is to be settled – once He’s settled, then He emits vibrations which go everywhere. He is the source of innocence. He is the source of the vibrations. He is everything, in a way.
When He ascends here as Mahaganesha within you, [Shri Mataji touches Her Back Agnya] and in God He descends as Ganesha – from here, on the back [Shri Mataji touches Her Back Agnya]. (While yoginis translate, Shri Mataji specifies: “Back Agnya”).So, when you think too much about sex, your eyes get ruined, because you are using Mahaganesha. Your Mahaganesha is spoilt, and your eyes starts wobbling. The eyes lose innocence, purity, and they start absorbing all that is filth. The eyes which are pure and innocent give innocence to others. Not only that, but they are the eyes, are the eyes through which the Spirit looks out.
It has many combinations which I have no time to tell you, but it’s a very bad thing that people get those unclean eyes, the bhootish eyes. And anybody who is bhootish around will turn their eyes to that person, because it’s a play of the satanic now playing now, the negative. And that is what we do when we do not place Ganesha at right places. If we have to make Ganesha reflected in our Mahaganesha stage at this point, we should try to keep our eyes very clean, so that you keep the seat of Mahaganesha clean.
In the Puja of Shri Ganesh you must bring the soft grass also, because durva, He’s fond of Durva, durva, that’s called as durva- because the soft grass is soothing to the eyes. Not only that, but it gives you the green part of the Swadishthana Chakra. Which – he exists when we have not started about thinking, you have not started the thinking process. That suggests that part of Swadishthana, when you are not thinking, the green part of it, the lower part of the Swadishthana is green. So, the green is the one: at that stage we have not become human beings, at that stage it represents the green of Swadishthana, where it created the whole universe, everything. Up to that it’s green.
Then when it starts creating the ego it becomes the yellow colour, where it uses the sun, the action part. Not “uses” the sun but becomes active, representing the sun side. So, the green represents actually the part of Ganesha, part of Ganesha in a way, because till then you are not thinking. You are at a level where you are close to the Mother Earth, you see. So, the Mother Earth is giving. The sun part has not started when the green is there, because the Mother Earth gives this green. Of course, the sun makes it green, that’s different point, but that you don’t start doing it. When you start doing something yourself at a human level, the whole thing becomes yellow.
So Swadishthana has two sides, the physical and the mental side. The physical side is the green side, and the mental side is the yellow side. So now we are today here to worship Shri Ganesh. Now I would like you to get some grass from the yard. Some soft grass, because that’s an important part of it. So, you should put your eyes onto the greenery to improve your Ganesha. And when it is very warm, then you can also walk barefoot on the green in the morning-time, when the dew is on it.
Those who are very overactive should take to the vegetarian diet, it will help them to become more towards the balanced side. Not as a fanaticism, but more on vegetables, and eat animals which are very small ones, it’s alright. (Grass is brought to Shri Mataji)But today I have not talked about His vahana and all that, because I’ve talked in other lectures. His vahana, His conveyance, I’ve not talked about it because I’ve talked about it in other lectures of Mine.
Shri Mataji: (Shri Mataji looks carefully at the grass and chooses a blade out of it:) “This is the best, if you can find it. Very thin. This kind. This is Durva. This one, it’s alright. You can get more, yes. With this the water is sprinkled. Those who have not washed My Feet, should wash My Feet today. (To a sahaja yogi who brought some grass) Oh, that’s good, that’s the thing. You got it exactly what I mean! Exactly! This is Durva, yes. But still some of them are hard, doesn’t matter. But it is this kind. They are round, with round blades. You can take out some of them? With round blades. Not the flat, but the round. Not with the edge, but the round ones. They are round, are they? Round, yes, that’s it, that’s it. They are not round ones. The round ones, alright? They’re all flat. This one’s round. Now this is flat, too. I don’t think you have here in this country. I think we should get (…) This will do. You just tie them with a string, that’s all, that will do, that is sufficient. Just to tie it up with some sort of a string. Just tie it up with a little string Gavin, and use it for sprinkling water. They are called as ‘durvankura’, means the…Ankura is the ‘tingling’s, tingling’s of that.
Discussion among yogis about traditions in usage of grass (A yogi says that in his country this grass is used to package Easter eggs for children).
Shri Mataji: In this?
Other yogi: Also, in England.
Shri Mataji: What do they do?
(Yogi says the grass is used to package Easter eggs for children)
Shri Mataji: Just see. (A child brings more grass). Oh, that’s correct. Yes. (…) Good, thank you. Just tie it up,this one also. Good. Can you tie this with the string also? That’s it. Good. Ah, you got some more. (Shri Matajities the grass into a small bunch). It’s big. Better to have the bigger ones, Gavin, because we haven’t got much choice.Now those who have to wash Me …use it for sprinkling on My Feet. (2:00:54) Those people who haven’t washed My Feet should come forward.(Gregoire speaks in French to some yogis)
Shri Mataji: Let her come, let her come. I’m so happy you could come! So nice to see you! Alright. Now come here. Now Gavin, one should do the washing and somebody should start reading. You can ask Me, yes, come along. Good, good, good. Now this will be after the puja, alright? So, all the four young children, where are they? Four. Where’s Arneau? (2:02:05) These have to wash Me first. Now. What about these four things I gave you? For the children. Alright, where have the children gone, four of them? Alright, we’ll have these four. Come along. Alright, now, come along. First of all, the children should come and wash My Feet. Come along. First of all, all the children. Come along, come along. Hold on. Wash My Feet, put some water. I think – where is she? Mari Amelia, Mari Amelia, and also, the yellow one, you bring from there, one yellow one.Rub it hard, rub it hard. (Gavin takes mantras in Sanskrit) Alright, have done the job. Now. (Gavin takes more mantras in Sanskrit)
May God bless you all. Good.
Shri Mataji: (Unclear) – is younger to her, is he?
Yogi answers: Yes, he is younger than she is.
Yogini says: Barbara is younger.
Shri Mataji: Barbara is younger, alright. (Gavin continues with mantras) Louder, now this is for you. (Gavin continues with mantras) (Shri Mataji presents some scarfs to the children) Hello, this is for you! For doing the puja, alright? (…) shouldbe given dakshina, you see…Alright. According to the sizes I’ve given, to their age. Alright now. Now take out the thing. It is to be given to the people…after children they’ll do it. They have to put it on their heads. Ask (unclear) to do it. Something should be under My Feet, a towel, somebody should…I think somebody who knows this should be here. Somebody to wipe My Feet, can you? The other one, who doesn’t have a camera. Come along. Come along. The towels could be there just to wipe My Feet. Just to put it here(Gavin recites a stotra. Shri Mataji explains and clarifies some of the names/terms used) (2:08;14) Today cannot be Dwitya, has to be Chaturthi. According to Indian, is Chaturthi, has to be. Or Chaturdashi, could be. When was this rakhi? (Yogi: Seventeen, sixteen days ago). Sixteen days ago, so it is after rakhi. (Gavin: Two days after new moon). That is, two days after new moon it is. It is, has to be Chaturdashi, fourth day, has to be in Indian time. Because Chaturthi is the day He is established, Ganesha is established on this Chaturthi – because Indian, is different, little bit particular. Must be starting now, about 12 o’clock, Chaturthi. Chaturthi. So, you need your translators.
Gavin: (Laughing) It’s just started, a few minutes!
Shri Mataji: It’s a Chaturthi, has to be. You see how it works out? Now, those who have not washed My Feet have to come. Now what you do is to take that thing now. Use this for washing. (Shri Mataji tells people to rub the Feet hard). Those who have not washed, please come. The lower part, yes rub it hard, hard, Tell her, very hard. Just turn, this water for drinking, good now, alright. (To a yogi): Now you realise that by rubbing My Feet, you’ve got your vibrations more. So rationally you understand.
Shri Mataji: Are you getting more now? Others can come! (2:13:51)
(Gavin continues reciting mantras)
Shri Mataji: Not to hold but to rub, more. Not to hold too much but to rub. Better now? Good. Has he been to Hari Rama? But he has done some mantras? (unclear) Right Vishuddhi. (Unclear) Better now? Now he has to read about Ganesha…Artharva (conversation continues)Your fingers should be rubbed, your fingers are to be rubbed, not Me. Alright. You are to rub your fingers, so that they become more sensitive. Alright? Come here, come. Read loudly. Loudly. Now. Listen to what he says, alright? Now, he’s reading, listen to him.(The divine essence of the prayer is read: Let Your presence be awakened…Shri  Mataji comments:) That meansawakening of Christ within us. Awakening of Shri Ganesha within us.
(To a person who has washed Her Feet) Now enjoy (yourself?). Now the flowers. You can put these first I think. First of all the washing should be done, all the washing should be done first and then…so, would you like to do of My feet or hands? (Yogis: Your feet) Alright. Get somebody who is free. You come along. You can. Yes. Brilliant. You come along. These two can, yes. So, what we can do this, we can work hard, because there has to be Swiss, and she is German, so it will help both. You come this side. Alright? Now. You pour the water; you will be in charge of water. Now you’ll do the rest, now tell her whatever is to be done. Yes, Panchamruta. Whatever Gavin says.
Shri Mataji gives instructions throughout and Gavin recites mantras. (Two ladies come to wash Her Feet. One small spoonful of water is put on Shri Mataji’s hands. She puts the drops into Her mouth and on Her Sahasrara) So your Mother doesn’t feel thirsty. Alright. (…) First is the ghee… (Then the two ladies rub the Amrut elements on Shri  Mataji’s Feet). We need more milk. Milk is the last one, is better. Little bit. He’s taking a photograph. Now have they got the milk? You put some water. Some sugar in between would be better. Water. Pour some more water, a little bit, on the toes. (Unclear), Rub it hard.
Shri Mataji: Such vibrations…her hands are shaking! Put it down. Her hands are shaking through vibrations! Just put it down. Such vibrations are there…Tremendous. This has vibrations also, just put it on your faces, and see the vibrations,
May God bless you, turn around let them see on the faces, you can see the vibrations.
You have to be careful, you have to put flowers, now what about other things, married ladies. Alright, I think first the unmarried should put,Unmarried ladies. In Sahaja Yoga you hardly find them! We have seven, I think. Three, four, five, six, seven. We have, somewhere, great. We have seven I think Good. Annie, come along, you aren’t married. Or are you married? (laughter).  You just have to start, that’s all. Just put the line, best is put the line through it, just put the line, the front line, just put the front line then it’s better. Maybe (unclear) from where did you get this? This Kum Kum is very red, Shri Ganesha is there.  Yes, no, Ganesha. But you have to do the Havana later…you can do 108…or Devi’s names. Devi’s names you can read, what Gregoire has given you. That’s a good one. Gauri’s names, yes. She’s Gauri, see, She’s the One Virgin, is the Mother of Shri Ganesh, so Her names can be read. You can read the names of the Virgin that Gregoire has given you. In French, somebody, and in English. Gregoire can do it.
Gregoire: I’ll read in Latin and then I’ll translate in English?
(The Kyrie Eleison is read in Latin as well as the names in Latin of the Virgin Mary. The yogis reply “Ora pro nobis”)
Married ladies, how many of you came? Unmarried ladies? How many were here? Seven. So, can you bring those plants? Seven plants should be given to unmarried people. Seven plants, that we brought. Begonias. Alright. I’ll give them. Come along. You have to look after. Unmarried. They are eight, bring one more. They are all coming from the heart, that is London! Bring one more. We have a lot more. I think there are two more are there? Two more? Two more, or three? Two. Bring two more. Two other, two virgins were here in the beginning. Who? Barbara and the other. Yes, your daughter, yes. They have the special day of the virgins and the children. Now where is Barbara gone? Who never married? Never married ladies? They are virgins too. They never married. Madeleine was married? How many more left? Three more. Alright, three more.(Lady says something) But still you are a virgin. Virgin is a virgin and she must be respected, whatever may be the age, alright?
Now there are two boys, three boys left, is it? Let them give, let them have the three boys, you see, they should not be left unhappy. That solves the problem. Shouldn’t make them unhappy. We have exactly three for the three boys. Come along, the boys. Where are they? That is their day today. Alright.
Look after it. Alright? Now where are the other, other two boys? Matthew never came for the puja. Here, but he didn’t come at the time of washing. What was he doing? Where were you, Matthew, at the time…why didn’t you come? You are a boy! For little boys, alright? Now this can go to Vincent, because the little are to look after the plants. You have to look after it immediately, I think. They are in a big mess. Where is he gone? Just call Vincent, that’s all. (The child takes the plant; the yogis around make admired comments about him).
And how seriously he lifts his Kundalini, you should see the way he lifts it and how he ties it, wonderful to see how he does it.(A child takes some food and the adults react). What about (unclear) now. Some flowers, one rose, some flowers. That’s the beauty of (unclear) the right thing…….Nothing serious, nothing serious. Let him have some something to eat. Get him something to eat, now I have had, eaten something, now you can give to everyone, because for the children specially. Give it to children, the Prasad. I’ve taken the Prasad. Now what else? Now for the married ladies. Married Ladies. To the children, to the children, just to the children. Where are the other married ladies? (Name unclear) Come along, all of you who are married. All the married ladies, come forward. Alright. Let’s have two sets of people. How many are there? Alright, we can manage. Who else is there? All the married ladies come forward. This is not for you, it’s for me. Alright, there’s another set. There’s one more, Now done, you have to put it in my hand, Now the red, now the green, now the red, now the green, thank you, now the red, the green, now the red, the green, now the red, how they tingle, they create fun (laughter). Now my hand is to be done, (Mother gives instructions) use this finger, agnya finger.
(The ladies put the bangles on the wrists of Shri Mataji following Her instructions.)