29 December 1991
Shri Lakshmi Puja: Sea is your grandfather
Chalmala, Alibag (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

To this Chalmaal village we have come many times, Mumbaikar also came many times, and many people from all over the world have come here many times. I’m glad to hear that the people stopped drinking alcohol. This is a big thing. There are two troubles in Konkan. One is that black magic is very common, as it is like an industry there, and it is now reduced. This is the blessing of Sahaja Yoga that black magic was stopped that time, and we should educate people about that. The second thing is drinking alcohol. This kind of thing was very common, because people don’t understand what to do in their free time. So they drink alcohol. They don’t understand how much damage is being done, how much money they are wasting due to their drinking habits.
Mumbai people should put in an effort to spread Sahaja Yoga to different villages nearby. People are suffering very much due to these bad habits. If such people get Self-realization then they will give up their bad habits. Due to this black magic, Lakshmi and Lakshmi’s principles cannot be established. That’s why everyone has trouble with money. Nevertheless, nowadays I have heard that the situation is better, and people also are behaving well. This is the benefit of practicing Sahaja Yoga, and you should spread this everywhere. That helps to grow people in every aspect.
Here the people are religious, they have built temples, they take God’s name, but you must do something for God, and people do not think about it. It will happen only after practicing Sahaja Yoga. So all of you people living here should tell about all the benefits of Sahaja Yoga, what we have benefited from Sahaja Yoga, what we got, how much we are blessed. When all the people know this, they will come into Sahaja Yoga themselves. Otherwise, their children will be destroy tomorrow. If we tell them, then they will understand. At least we should bring their children into Sahaja Yoga.
We have come many times in this village, and this place is very much blessed. Everybody is very happy to come here and they want to come here every time. They are saying, “Whatever happens we must come here, Mother.” So there are infinite blessings for all of you.
Now, to talk about Mumbai people, we have worked hard for Mumbai. Yet two of the three tendencies among the Mumbai people are still very tremendous. First, the cult of personality is very much. They will run fast for prizes, but when they are asked for money they avoid it. Do not do that, because where we should we get money now? We do not take any money for Sahaja Yoga, and so where do we get the money? If we want to do a program, that needs money, renting a hall needs money. You can give some money. You are offering lots of money to Siddivinayk temple. You are offering lots of money to imposter sadhus/ fraud people.  If you are not giving a little bit of money for God’s work, then when will you give it? And you will pay for this, if you do not help while you are in Sahaja Yoga.
My parents sacrificed a lot for this country. They sacrificed all their gold, money and everything for the country. They sold our homes, burned their clothes and went to jail. My mother went to jail five times. My father went to jail so many times, and that was also for two to three years. We were all children at that time, and our education was ongoing. But even then, they sacrificed so much at that time and they sacrificed a lot for our country’s freedom.
We do not have to sacrifice anything for Sahaja Yoga. That’s not necessary. There are lots of blessings in this work, and you will easily get all of those blessings. You do not have to pay anything for this. But in this work Mumbai people have to spend some money, and I am very surprised that Mumbai people are not helping in this, even though they have the highest amount of money.
The second thing is that saints did lots of great work in Maharashtra, but I have seen in Sahaja Yoga people have not detached from their relatives. The letter comes from every place that someone is not behaving well with someone; they behave like this. So, the people from fifty countries came under one umbrella, and you saw a totally different pattern in Maharashtra. The big surprise is that we started Sahaja Yoga in Delhi just three years ago, and it has grown ten times more than in Maharashtra. What is the reason for this? The saints worked hard here, we rejected them, and now what we are going to do by fighting with each other? Some people are doing this and making money. So, I wonder if people do not have any fear of God in Maharashtra. The way people still make money is very surprising. So, those who make money in Sahaja Yoga, do not give them money at all and do not even pay attention to them.
Now Sahaja Yoga should grow in Maharashtra, and we need to do hard work for this to happen. Mr. Gaikwad goes to many places and he has increased Sahaja Yoga so much. But others are not doing anything. You are not even talking about Sahaja Yoga to your relatives, to your friends. You are not stopping quarrelling with each other! So it should end. Only this much is not enough, but Sahaja Yoga should grow. Because whatever you do, you will get religious merit out of that work, but if you don’t do it, then it will be harmful to you; the responsibility is too big.
For twenty-one years I have been fighting in Mumbai city. So I wanted to say to Mumbai people that Sahaja Yoga has to spread more in Mumbai. Just for Me or just to attend the center is not enough, and you have to go beyond that. There are now many centers, but what work happens in those centers? People are coming to the center, doing meditation, listening to Shri Mataji’s speech and so on. You have to go beyond that. You should meet people and tell them about Sahaja Yoga. There are many small villages. You should go there and organize big programs, and you should be totally involved in such types of Sahaja Yoga work.
If we look at Russia, we have only gone there three times, and in those three times, only to one village. You will be surprised that almost twenty-two thousand people are Sahaja yogis, and now they have a big space. The government has offered ten to twelve acres of land to us, and the Russian people gave us twenty million. That’s what the Russian people did. What are you doing? Mumbai people can’t even build a single ashram in Mumbai. There is no growth in Mumbai. The only thing they ask Me is, “Mother, please cure our disease. Mother, please fix this, fix that.” Diseases will spread like this, if you will not do anything for Sahaja Yoga.
So, every Sahaja yogi has to understand how much money they should spend for Sahaja Yoga. In the next year, Sahaja Yoga has to grow in Maharashtra. Otherwise, I have decided I will not come to Maharashtra again. Already I have boycotted three to four villages. If nothing happens after I have done so much hard work in Maharashtra, why should I go to such a place? People are attending puja because they are getting something out of puja, but at the time of giving money, no one is present. This is not right. So please, everyone understand that Mother has given us Self-realization, but what we are doing in return? What did you do for God? Did you give anything? Did you work hard?  Did you give Realization one person? Think about that. Each and every one of you can give Realization a thousand people, but no, you are not talking about it. You are not talking about Sahaja Yoga to your relatives. When someone comes to your place, you remove Mother’s photo. Stop all these things, and this should not be repeated.
Sahaja Yoga’s work should be done with fearlessness, and if this work is not done in Maharashtra, who will take care of it? Ask the saint’s spirit, how much they might be in pain due to people’s behavior. So many souls in Maharashtra. Mahakali, Mahalaxmi, Mahasaraswati are the three Goddesses. Ashtavinayak is also here, but nothing is working out.
So now awaken from the sleeping state, spread Sahaja Yoga, and decide that you will do something for Sahaja Yoga. I am requesting you, please don’t do that. It is very wrong: thinking bad about others, fighting with each other, not giving money for Sahaja Yoga. Please don’t do this. I do not want your money, but for Sahaja Yoga work, money is needed. Not just this, but when people came to Ganpatipule, they stayed somewhere else; they ate food somewhere else just to save money. We always keep everything so cheap, which will never burden you, but people are saving money here, too.
God will also do similar things with you. So you will ask Me, “Shri Mataji how has this happened?” If you want to solve the problem, first of all remove from your head that we are different. First, we all are one; second, you all have to do something for Sahaja Yoga. If you don’t have money, then give Sahaja Yoga to people. At least you can do that? Can you do that? Think about how many people you have given Self-realization to, till now. How many people I have brought to Sahaja Yoga? It must be remembered how you behaved.
This time only the youth of Mumbai did a tremendous job, and I congratulate them. (Applause)
We have come to this place many a times, this beautiful place, you all like it. It’s very rustic, absolutely in the interior. Only thing is, coming all the way from Ganapatipule, you have to spend lot of time. All this you are doing just to enjoy the beauty of nature, and to be with the nature.
I have told you already that this fruit of coconut is called as Shriphala, because it is the Sahasrara, and it’s very surprising that this fruit knows and understands. It won’t fall on any animal or on any person. If you are sleeping here, it will never fall on you. Nobody is hurt, ever, by this fruit. It is so sensible, more than human beings, because we do hurt others, we do trouble others, we don’t think what we are doing. But in Sahaja Yoga there’s lot of sweetness, goodness, righteousness, and it’s so encouraging. Also so many people are there, newly married. I congratulate them, all of them. (Applause)
Now try to be kind to each other. If you are reserved in the beginning, you’ll have to pay for it. Please try to be nice, kind and talkative; not that you just keep quiet and don’t talk to someone. Maybe there’s sort of a way of impressing others: not in our Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga I talk too much, that’s why My throat is off today, and you also talk. Talking is very important, not hiding your feelings. I have told lots of things about it, how to make a marriage happy, that will make you very happy also. If you have very good marriages we’ll have very good children born to you, and then we’ll have a new race of people in this world. These children will be the most powerful things for us, and they’ll work out many things which we could not work out.
Regarding our tour, I hope you have been happy about it, and then you enjoyed all the programs that we had. (Applause)
Today I am going to tell you something about the sea, because we are next to the sea here, and must understand the feelings of a sea. Sea is your grandfather in a way, because he gave birth to Lakshmi, who becomes Mahalakshmi later on. So this sea which is the grandfather, we have to show all respect to him. Normally the way people are living, in the West specially, also in India, people go and use it for bathrooms. But also in the West they use it in a very funny way, that they use it for swimming and all kinds of things, by which they wear funny dresses and lead a very licentious life. This is an insult to the sea. We must respect the sea. In India we worship the sea. We have to worship the sea. And in the Greek mythology also they had a, as we have Varuna, they too had a God for sea.
So this God for sea has to be worshipped, and has to be understood and to be respected. We cannot be disrespectful. Before entering into sea you must say namaskar to the sea, and coming out of it also you must say namaskar. The way we behave towards the sea is not proper.
As you know, because of sea we get rain. If there was no sea we would not have rain, we would not have anything. Sea is so important to our life. The greatest thing is, sea is the Guru, is the Mahaguru which teaches us so many things. First of all, this Mahaguru is the one, creates salt for us. Christ has said: “You are the salt, salt of the universe”; meaning, you are the one which gives taste and all the qualities of the salt to the human being.
So this sea is there, we have to learn a lot from this sea. The first of all is that it has its own maryadas. Supposing you try to press the sea from this side, it will appear on the other side. It always keeps to its maryadas. Such a huge thing are these oceans – are such huge, but they keep to their maryadas, they never cross their maryadas. While we just start encroaching on everybody’s maryadas.
So the maryadas of the sea is very important – that it just keeps to its own line. You can draw the line when it is a high tide, next day, whenever there will be a high tide, it will be just there. So imagine such a huge thing like an ocean can keep itself to the same maryadas, why can’t we, with such a personality of ours, should keep to ourselves and to our maryadas?
Then the second quality of the sea is that it looks after all the animals that are in it. Somehow it is a saltish thing, but there are fishes and there are all kinds of animals which exist in the sea, and that’s why it is, we should say, the first life came into being in the sea. So all our forefathers, long time back, must have been born in the sea, and then we, now we have become human beings. So we have no right to insult the sea, where our forefathers must have existed and then they started coming out, one by one as the fish came, as a reptile.
Now the third quality of the sea is that it is a deep thing, it is very deep. In some places is extremely deep. If the depth of the sea is reduced even by few, few feet, there will be problem all over. It keeps to its depth. It doesn’t leave its depth. It keeps to its maryadas, and it keeps to its depth. In the same way, whatever depth we have got in Sahaja Yoga, we should keep to that.
Normally we should not become cheap type people, we cannot afford. We have to be deep people with deep understanding of Sahaja Yoga, deep understanding of ourselves, because that’s the sign of dignity. And that dignity you must have, that majestic nature of the sea you must have.
Now these trees as they are you see, are very surprisingly, they are getting all the wind from, from the sea. But if you go nearer the sea when they are planted, they all bend towards the sea, never away. They give their, sort of, gratitude by bending towards the sea. Though the wind is blowing the other way round, but they’re not bothered about the wind. Their gratitude is to the sea, so they bend towards the sea. Even these trees understand what it is like.
Without the sea we could not have had any transport from places to places as we have been, and also there is a great lot of wealth inside the bed of the sea which is not yet explored; but once explored, the whole world can be very rich. But they are fighting about it, which part is ours, which part is yours; that in that fight do you know, I think all this inside the sea might shift from one place to another!
And lots of wealth which is of…which is like gold, silver, diamonds, are all embedded in the sea. And one day may be that this Lakshmi might be discovered, and we people will be enriched all over. Moreover when we carry the transport, we carry Lakshmi from one place to another, from another place to this place, so the sea has given us that mobility and movement.
I have seen the sea reacts to Me very much. It reacts, because if there’s a light in the sea, or a sun in the, moon in the sea reflecting, it moves with Me, I’ve seen it, it moves with Me. The sea understands Me very well, because I have a special relationship and a respect for that sea.
Now when you are here, I hope you’ll understand the value of the sea. Because of the sea you are so much enjoying here, it is giving you such good feelings, and all spirituality.
There is no need to go to Himalayas. The – whatever is covering is in the Himalayas, is what is nothing but the water from the sea only. It’s one of the circles, that water passes to the Himalayas, then comes back as rivers, again falls into the same sea. They have to come to the sea. So it is everything ends up here. And then it is allowed – it goes through tapasya – it allows the Sun to create that cloud by suffering the heat, heat of the Sun, and becomes vapours, and then it goes as clouds and you get your rain. In the same way we have to be; we have to bear the heat of others, the anger of others and create vapours – means the blessings, the vibrations for others. It is with Me, same thing. When I see somebody who is sick and I treat him, of course I have to bear a little bit, sometimes quite a lot, then I absorb it and then they become vibrations. They just start flowing as vibrations. So this is what you have to learn from the sea, which is very important for sahaja yogis, that you absorb everything, doesn’t matter. But don’t get attached to it, and let it become vapours, and the Sea can now become the vapours. As you all are here, all these vapours as vibrations should flow.
This method you should try to understand by courage. Because the other day when I was coming, there was a lady sitting just on the way: “Mother, her feet are out of order, or something gone wrong. Please treat her.” Why should I treat? Why can’t you treat? Are you afraid to treat someone? Then there’s another one who comes up to say: “Mother, You treat her.” Why can’t you treat? You all can treat them, you can help them, and you’ll be surprised, the more you’ll treat them the better you will be. You should venture, you should have that much courage to treat others. If you don’t treat others you won’t grow because that is what, like the sea, as you have seen, you become the vibrations. And when you treat others there are more vibrations.
Why should God give you vibrations if you are not going to use it? Simple logic. Why should God give you light if you are not going to use it? Christ has said that, “You don’t put light under a measure.” That’s what we are doing when we are not using our hands, our feet, our brains for Sahaja Yoga: we are not creating vibrations within ourselves. The same body that is yours can just become a bundle of vibrations, if you start using these vibrations. But if you don’t use these vibrations you’ll have problems, the problems, all the time, and you will not understand why, “I am doing everything. I am doing this”. Because you are not using your vibrations.
You have to use your vibrations in every way possible, wherever is possible, to help others to get all right, to get well. You can at the most take a bandhan if you like, if you think that it might hurt you or something, but at least, use my photograph. And after the photograph, you can just touch the person, there’s no harm. After all, if you are afraid even of any troubles, then what’s the use of becoming a Sahaja Yogi? If the ship is not seaworthy, what’s the use of making a ship? You have to be seaworthy.
And that’s what you have to decide, that, “We are going to be Sahaja Yoga worthy, and for that we are going to absorb all the vibrations, we are going to take up everything upon ourselves”. Little trouble also they have, they’ll tell Me ten times, “We went there, then this happened, then that happened, then this”. But I never tell you anything, what happens to Me, how I came here, what was there; nothing! Because I know that all this is, whatever I am doing, is created into vibrations.
In the same way, have faith, that you are all just like the sea, like the Mahaguru, and that whatever you are doing is creating vibrations within you, by which you can save so many. It’s something like a cycle again, I said, that the more you give, the more you get. The more you use your vibrations, much more you’ll get it. It’s a very nice cycle that is acting as it has acted in the case of the sea, as I told you, that the water goes to the Himalayas, comes back at rivers. In the same way manifold, manifold your vibrations will be growing, and I would say that you should always use our vibrations for helping others, for giving to many things, to the plant, to the anything. I mean there were some people who brought a plant, “Mother, give vibrations to that.” I said, “Why don’t you give the vibrations?”
There’s no need even to take vibrated water. You can vibrate yourself. That state has to come, that you can vibrate your own water, you can vibrate the whole waters everywhere, there’s no need to take vibrated water from Me. Maybe Mine is a little more, but doesn’t matter! (Laughter & applause) You are so many, so what – compared to Me, I’m only one. So all of you can work it out and do such a lot; but have faith in yourself. As the sea has faith in itself, you should have complete faith in yourself. You must respect your Self Realization. Tell every day to yourself, “I am a sahaja yogi. I am a yogi, I am a saint, I am a realised soul. I have to do this. How can I do these other nonsensical things? I have to do these good things. I have to talk to people in a sweet manner, I have to try to work it out this way.”
It is actually your faith in yourself is going to help. Your faith in yourself – that you are a great sahaja yogi, that you are absolutely surrendered to your Mother, works very fast. That faith you should have, that you are a sahaja yogi. Nothing else is needed.
May God bless you all!
So today we’ll have a Lakshmi pujan, because of the Sea, and I think that will help everyone.