5 November 1987
Feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out of your head
Madrid (Spain)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Public Program Day 1, 05 November 1987- Madrid, Spain
I bow to all the seekers of truth. But when we talk of truth, we have to understand that truth is what it is. We cannot organize it, we cannot mentally conceive it. It is what it is. In our arrogance if we try to propound something as truth it will be very easily shown and exposed that it is not. Truth is subtler. and can come to us if we become subtler personalities. We have the knowledge of the tree outside. But we have no knowledge of our roots, and we have to humble down as students of knowledge, to understand what is in our roots. If you have a scientific mind, then you must keep it open. and see for yourself what is the truth. If I put before you any statement you should treat it like a hypothesis. And then if you achieve it, then you have to believe as honest people that that’s the truth. Truth has to be absolute. Those who achieve it, all of us must say the same thing. But those who do not achieve can come out with many varieties of propositions. Truth is to be felt on your central nervous system. As you can clearly see there are flowers here which are white in colour and you can feel them as flowers. You should be able to feel the truth. If you do not feel the truth on your central nervous system, then you should not believe into something because it was followed by your forefathers.
So with a very open mind, we have to see to it, that truth is beyond human awareness. Unless and until you rise to a level of a realized soul, you cannot feel the truth. That means you have to have your rebirth. But it is not just a false certificate that you are being born again. It is the actualization. It is not like, somebody saying, “All right, I baptize you here and you have finished with it”. But it is actually feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out of your head. Unless and until you have become the Spirit you cannot get connected to the Divine. It is said that we are surrounded by the All Pervading Power of God’s Love. But have you feel it? As described in many various Scriptures that it, you can feel it like a cool breeze, did you feel that way? You cannot pay for getting to truth. You cannot purchase it. Because it is a living process of evolution, of a living force that has to do this. And any living force you cannot purchase.
Like in the Mother Earth you put a seed and it sprouts by itself You cannot force Mother Earth to do that. And you cannot pay Mother Earth for that. It has to happen spontaneously by the power of the Mother Earth. If the seed is all right, then it will sprout and it will be transformed into a plant. In the same way we are transferred and transformed into a new awareness. This awareness is called as the collective consciousness. That is, you can feel your inner being on your fingertips. You can feel another person also on your fingertips.
Mohammed Sahib has said in Quran that there will be a time of Kiama, means the Resurrection, when your hands will speak and give witness against you, In the Bible we know of the Last Judgment. God is not going to judge us by putting us in the weight, measurements. You are going to judge yourself. So… Did you talk about Kundalini? So the force that is within you called Kundalini, rises through the various centers within you which are subtler. You become sensitive on your fingertips. You can feel it very clearly what’s wrong with you and what’s wrong with others. People suddenly find out they have got cancer. They suddenly find out that they get heart attacks. Suddenly they find out they are schizophrenic. Suddenly they find out about their relations that they are sick. There is no information when all these problems are growing up. Only when you are a realized soul, you can feel it on your fingertips that these problems are growing up. Now, if you know how to control or to check, or to correct these problems, then you are the healthiest person going round. You can never get into any disease, your diseases can be cured, your mental problems can be cured. Not only that but your attention becomes so powerful, that sitting down here, you can feel the chakras of other people. Because you enter into a new realm of awareness, where you start feeling the All Pervading Power. This All Pervading Power Itself is the subtle of all the elements. It is the subtle of the ether. It is the subtle of the light. When it is the subtle of everything and you have become a subtle, you establish a contact with that subtle. So you become the Spirit. The English language has a problem. because Spirit means also alcohol. Also it means a dead body or dead person. But what I am meaning here is the Atma, is the Spirit, which resides as the reflection of God Almighty in your heart. In these modern times is very difficult to talk about God. People don’t like it. In the name of God, many wrong things have been done. Many religions which sing the praise of God have been doing all kinds of nonsensical things. For any logical man it doesn’t make much sense. But whether you like it or not God exists.
You should not judge Him by the people who have spoilt His name, those who have used His name to massacre people, to oppress them. He is there, He is truth and He is Love. He is peace. When you find your Spirit the first thing happens to you that you become extremely a peaceful person. All agitations drop out, People talk of peace organizations, but they have no peace within, how can they give peace to others? You have to have peace within yourself. Those who talk of sufferings to achieve God, are just misleading people. This is a kind of a money making proposition, to say that you have committed sins so you better pay for them. As if God understands what is money. You do not have to suffer. Christ has already suffered for you. Are you going to suffer more than Him? Or did He leave any sufferings for you to complete His work? That is a very wrong idea which is put into many people, that you have to suffer. On the contrary I would say, you have to be very, you have to be very pleasantly placed towards yourself. And not to feel guilty at all, to know that you are a human being at the epitome of the evolution. If you suffer from such guilt and such horrible ideas about yourself, you’ll become very arrogant and very destructive and violent. But if you realize that you are the one who has become a human being, after going through various circles of life and now you are here to get your Self Realization, to become a super-human being then you won’t do all that. For human beings it is very easy to accept wrong ideas. It doesn’t appeal to them somehow the right ideas. And that’s why one has to have a very balanced outlook. You have already heard about the channels that are within us. And tomorrow he will again tell you about the chakras that are within us.
These are the subtle centers within us, created by great incarnations during our evolutionary process. All these great incarnations, prophets, are real. They were like the flowers on the tree of life at different time. But people tried to pluck out the flowers for themselves saying, “this is mine, this is mine” and have created dead flowers and dead religions. Religion exists within ourselves. They are ten valances we have got. You must have seen in the periodical laws of chemistry that matter has got only eight valances. Animals have nine, and human beings have ten. And when we fail from those valances, we become inhuman or subhuman. That is what we have to achieve is to become the Spirit. To become the Spirit, you have to know that so far we have been living in a relative world, not in an absolute world. We do not know whether we are right or wrong. So the Spirit is the absolute knowledge within us. It gives us the absolute knowledge. It is the source of all the knowledge. And when it enlightens in our attention, this attention itself knows everything. Not only it knows but it acts. It works. Like if there is a television transmission we all can see it in our homes that transmition. But it doesn’t act, we can just see it. But here your attention acts. Always, whatever is benevolent it works out that way.
Now the other side of it, the person who becomes the Spirit, becomes a peaceful, joyous person. He emits joy all around himself. Such a person is a magnetic person. His innocence is awakened within him. And even the glance of such a person is so innocent, without any lust and greed, that such a person can give nothing but bliss. Such a person is a very powerful person, but extremely compassionate. As we can see in the life of Christ, when Mary Magdalene was stoned, He stood before Her, though He had nothing to do with her. And He said, “Those who have not committed any sin, can throw the stones at Me”. And it happened, that nobody threw a stone at Him. This is what one has to achieve, is complete joy, and that detachment which gives you a complete power to solve your problems. Like when you are in the water, you are afraid of the waves. But when you are in a boat you can see them. But if you know how to swim, you can enjoy them. In that way you have to become the master. I have to confess that I have been coming to Spain for the last ten years or so. But so far in Spain I didn’t find people who would understand Sahaja Yoga. It is very surprising. First when I had come, the queen who was here, had told Me that there are fifty thousands Spanish boys who are following a guru and they have become mad. Those fifty thousand I don’t know where are they. They paid lot of money to this man. He bought Rolls Royces after Rolls Royces. And then he married an American lady and has become an American dandy as they call it. But Sahaja Yoga is not understood by Spanish, though there are fourteen other countries who are doing so much better.
When I had first come, there were not so many buildings, nothing, it was all digging up, it just had started building something. I think the attention may be on building up the nation and getting to affluence. Affluence doesn’t give joy. It gives problems. In all the affluent countries people have got tremendous problems. Look at America, has got AIDS. England, you have got people who are hippies, taking drugs. It’s a very big problem. Even twelve years old children taking drugs. Same in France, same in Switzerland, people are committing suicide. Sweden, Norway, which are very affluent countries are competing. as to who commits more suicides. So with affluence you must have your Spirit otherwise you cannot enjoy life. So you have to be wise about it. It’s a life chance, lives’ chance I should say of many lives, that you have to get to your Spirit. And you should not get lost into ideologies and people who try to tell you big stories. They just come here to make money out of you. You must see from the people who have gone to them and what has happened to them. They are all lost people. I’m not here to take anything from you, not for a vote from you. I’m not a politician. I’m here to give you the key of your own wealth. And I hope you people receive it and make best of your life. I’m sure it will work out tonight, your Realization. It takes hardly any time. But you should be on the receiving end. I cannot force it on you. You have to ask for it. There’s no obligation. Like one light which is enlightened can light another light. In the same way it works out. And you can also become powerful enough to enlighten others. Only thing is you must treat your life with respect and not to treat it so frivolously. Otherwise it is not going to work out.
I hope today all of you get your Realization. May God bless you. Now, if you have any questions you can ask Me, questions, but not aggressive questions. Because I have not come here to take anything from you. I have come here to give you something. And this is to be understood very well. Last time I remember, in Spain, they asked the maximum questions that I have ever come across. We spent about an hour on that. Of no avail, because very few people got Realization. It’s too much of mental activity. It was very disappointing. I hope today something will work out. Now please ask the question.
Shri Mataji: What is she saying?
Sahaja Yogi: She’s, she’s saying Mother that you mentioned God as a Him, a He. Are You trying to give God a sex, or why don’t You call it a It?
Shri Mataji: Oh, I see, the sex problem. Don’t take it to God, My child. You see, it’s a wrong thing the way we are going on about it. I agree that so far God has been called as He. I’m just going to translate because she’s asking in English. And very surprising, in the West, where the people are so advanced and civilized, they try to put down the role of women that low. And that’s why the reaction is there, I understand. But we should not go into reactions. We should see to fundamentals. We talk of Trinity, one is God Almighty, second is God the Son, and the third as the Holy Ghost. And you ask any bishop what is Holy Ghost, he’ll say, “I’m agnostic”. Now, there cannot be a Father and a Son without a Mother. So, there has to be a Mother. But Indian Scriptures, called the Holy Ghost as the Adi Shakti, as the Primordial Mother. She’s, She’s even in a way more worshipped than the Father. Father is the One who watches the Mother’s creation. It is the Mother who creates and Father is the spectator.
So, I was born Myself in a protestant Christian family, and I asked My father why Martin Luther also played down the role of Christ’s Mother. He said that, it is because that time there were Muslims who were very powerful, and Muslims didn’t want to know about the Women, so he thought is better not to talk about it. But whatever they may try, everywhere I see is a temple for the Mother. Even if you go onto any top of a mountain which is inaccessible you find one temple to the Mother. So there is no need to fight with the men. Men and women are like two wheels of a chariot. And they are complementary. If…  they are equal but not similar. And if women understand what their powers are they would never fight with them. Sahaja Yoga is for enjoyment not for fighting. We have many people married in Sahaja Yoga and they are leading a very happy married life. There is no domination of one on another. Two Spanish ladies have married two Italians, actually Romans, but they are very happy and very happily married. All right. And I am also a woman here sitting. Yes.
Sahaja Yogi: Mother, he says that when You give Realization, when You talk about Realization, what kind of approaches or what kind of attitude should he have to receive it? Or should he have any previous knowledge for it?
Shri Mataji: Not at all, nothing. You are all built in, there’s all there. Like now, you have all these lights here already built in. The whole thing is there. You have just to switch on, that’s how it is. You don’t have to know how these lights came, what is their history, who has found it out. Nothing of the kind. You will get Realization without that.
Shri Mataji: Now, this lady. How can we begin to…?
Sahaja Yogi: The truth? She says how can she know the truth tonight?
Shri Mataji: She can know the truth?
Sahaja Yogi: Tonight. How can she do it?
Shri Mataji: You see, when you are awakened, your Kundalini which is the residual force within you, is awakened. You see, the Spirit resides in your heart, but has the seat here in the fontanel bone area, so once that Kundalini, that forth force touches it, then you become suddenly aware of the surrounding All Pervading Power. And through that, you can know, for example now if you have to find out about yourself, you have to just say, “What’s wrong with me?” and suddenly you start feeling a tingling say on one finger. Now, this is decoded and you will find out this chakra is out, and this is the chakra here. So this chakra is out and if you know how to cure yourself you are all right. With others also you will get the vibrations. You will get the vibrations about that person and you can feel it on your fingertips. All right?
Shri Mataji: She knows English. You tell them.
Shri Mataji: Now there are seven chakras, you see, and left and right side. Now one, two, three, four, five, six and seven. Five, six and seven chakras on the right side and seven chakras on the left hand side. And when you meet them like this, one inner center is formed, from left to the right, all right? Now what happens that, when the Kundalini passes through this middle path then your fingers get enlightened, they have the sensibility through which you know the truth.
Shri Mataji: Right side gives you the physical and the mental conditions, and the left side gives you the emotional.
Shri Mataji: What he’s saying?
Sahaja Yogi: He says he’s got two, he’s got two questions for you Mother. What is after death? And if there is any scientific proof of the movement of this energy, Kundalini.
Shri Mataji: Yes, there is lot of scientific proof. Now, you shouldn’t worry about your death. The first stated question you asked about the attitude. So first is don’t worry about the past or the future worry about the present, that should be the attitude. And the scientific proof of it is, you yourself can feel the cool breeze on top of your head and you can feel the cool breeze all around you. And with this you can cure people, you can know the truth, so many things you can do. Now, in Delhi University, two doctors have got PhD for doing, doctors have got PhD for doing research in Sahaja Yoga, which has proved that it is scientifically true.
Shri Mataji: There are some serious seekers today, thank God. Let them get their Realization. Those who think their questions are very important, can write them down and send them over tomorrow morning, and I will answer them. So I would like you to be little cooperative with Me. Also you’ll be surprised that nowhere in the world I’ve seen people leave seats like this and go away. They come all the way for Realization, and then they just leave half way when the lecture is over. I’ve never seen. They, they, you see it’s like a, even in a church if you go, you’ll sit down to listen to a boring thing, isn’t it? I mean, this is what, they come all the way, and just this shows, you see, what I am saying that, those who really are seekers have to be serious people, because as I see is that you have to work it out for your country very much. Maybe that you are not fed up of your mental activities as others are. Others are overdeveloped people you see, so they are fed up with their mental activities. And they ask questions like this, “Mother you cut my throat but stop the thinking”. They are fed up with their heads, with their thinking. Perhaps that is thing we must stop now, just to have your Realization. I’m your own. I’m not different from you. I too have black hair like the Spanish have. Many people in many countries say also that I look a Spanish person. So I am your own, and take it. Please, try to understand. Is very important. No use delaying it anymore. Because tomorrow you’ll get sick, you’ll have problems, and then you’ll come to Me, I won’t be able to help you so much. Believe Me, I’m very much concerned about Spain, very much. May God bless you.
Now, firstly you have to love yourself, and you must know that you are born as a human being and you have to achieve it in the glory of a human being. Now, you just have to take out your shoes if you don’t mind, because that’s how the Mother Earth helps us. Even the light candle helps a lot. I’ll show you later on. By taking out your shoes also you feel little relaxed. Anything that is tight, say here or here, can be made little loose. Also, make yourself comfortable. Sit comfortably. But you don’t have to bend your neck or come forward like that, but sit in a straight manner in a comfortable way. It is surprising that people get their Realization on the chairs. In olden days they had to go to Himalayas and sit on the ice to get their Realization. And only one or two would get it. Today it has become so simple and easy for you. So respect yourself. And love yourself as I love you. You must see yourself as I see you as important; and importance of your life. All right.
Now, please put your left hand towards Me like this. It is, you have to little bit cooperate with Me comfortably on the chair, on the chair, on your lap, comfortably. And put the right hand, used to be used, right hand is to be used for the action, to give energy to different centers on the left hand side for the Kundalini to rise. Now forget about negativity. And forget about all your mistakes and guilt and everything. You must be pleasantly placed towards yourself. Very pleasantly placed.
Now, I will first tell you how we will be touching all the centres. The first we put our hand on our heart. In the heart resides the Spirit. Now, we put our hand to another centre on the left hand side is the upper part of our abdomen. Then we put our right hand in the lower portion of our abdomen. Lower, lower portion, in the lower portion. Absolutely. There, yes. Now, this is the center of our pure knowledge, which manifests once when you get realized. It gives you the knowledge of the divine laws. Now, again we put back our hand on the upper portion of our stomach, on the left hand side. This is the centre of our mastery, created by all the masters. Now, raise your right hand and put it on the heart. This is the centre as I have told you, of our Spirit. Now, we put our right hand between the neck and the shoulder here, on the corner and turn it to the right side. Now, you have to know that there should be no guilt. This is the worst center now because you are all feeling guilty for nothing at all. So not to feel guilty at all. Now, you have to put your hand on your forehead across, like this, and press it hard on both the sides. Now, you have to take this hand and put it on the backside of your head and put the load of your head on that hand. Now, you have to stretch your hand and put the center of your palm on top of the fontanel bone area which was a soft bone in your childhood. Push back your fingers and press it hard, your scalp and move it seven times., slowly, clockwise. That’s all we have to do. Now, please close your eyes. You are not to open your eyes. You may also take out your glasses. You’ll feel better. Your eyes may improve. Please don’t open your eyes till I tell you. Please try to cooperate.
Now, put your hands again, left hand towards Me, and right hand on the heart. Both the feet parallel to each other. Now, you have to ask Me a very fundamental question, you can call Me, Shri Mataji or Mother, “Mother am I the Spirit?”. Ask this question three times. If you are the Spirit, you are also your own master. The Spirit guides you. Now, put your right hand on the upper part of your abdomen. This is the centre of your mastery, so ask Me a question three times, “Mother am I my own master?” Now, put your right hand on the lower part of your abdomen, with left hand towards Me and both the feet apart from each other. Now, you ask Me, because I cannot force you the pure knowledge. I cannot overcome your freedom, so please say, “Mother may I have the pure knowledge”, “Mother please give Me pure knowledge”, six times, because this center has got six petals. Now, raise your right hand onto the upper part of your abdomen, on the left hand side. Now, the thing is that as you have asked for pure knowledge the Kundalini has started moving, and you have to facilitate Her movement. At this upper chakra please say from your heart, with full confidence, “Mother I am my own master”. Please say ten times. Now, you raise your right hand on your heart. Here again you have to say with full confidence in yourself, with full heart in it, “Mother I am the Spirit”, twelve times. This is the fundamental truth that you are the Spirit, not this body, not this mind, not this ego. Now, one has to know that Divine is the ocean of love and compassion. But above all, it is the ocean of forgiveness and you cannot do any mistakes which cannot be, engulf the power of forgiveness. Loudly. Now, you raise your right hand in the corner of your neck and your head, and turn your head to your right. Hold it tight and say with full confidence in yourself, “Mother I am not guilty at all”. Say it sixteen times. In case, even then you want to feel guilty, you better punish yourself by saying it hundred and eight times. On the left hand side I said, not on the right hand side. Now, put your hand on your forehead and press it on both the sides. Now here you have to say, from your heart, “Mother I forgive everyone”. You might say it is very difficult but whether you forgive or you don’t forgive, it’s a myth. But if you do not forgive then you play into wrong hands.
Now, please put your right hand on the backside of your head and put your head on aid with its load and put your head upward. Here, you have to say for your own satisfaction that, “Oh, Divine, if I have done any mistakes please forgive me”. But don’t feel guilty, don’t count mistakes. Now, please, stretch your hand and put it on top of your head, on the spot which was a soft bone in your childhood, and press back your fingers. So you can press it hard, not with your fingers, but with your palm. Now press it hard. Push back your fingers, then move it seven times, slowly and saying that, “Mother give me my Realization”, because again I cannot force on you without your asking. Seven times. Now, please take down your hands, and open your eyes slowly. Now, put your right hand towards Me, and with your left hand try to feel if there’s a cool breeze is coming out of your head. No, no, don’t turn, just see, just see, don’t say “no” just now. Just see, here, here. Don’t start saying “no” before you have felt it. Bend your head, would be better. Bend your head, could be better. Now, put your left hand towards Me, and feel it with the right hand. Some might feel hot. Now, put your right hand towards Me, and feel it, bend your head. Now, put both your hands towards the sky, and ask a question, “Is this the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost?” “Is this the Brahma Shakti?” “Is this is the God’s power of love?” Ask this question three times. Now put down your hands. Open your eyes. Now see, put your hands. Watch Me, watch Me without thinking. Much better now. Now those who have felt the cool breeze in their hand or through their head, please raise both your hands. It’s quite a lot. You didn’t feel? All right, all right, we’ll see now. Those who have not felt we’ll see them. All right. If the Sahaja Yogis can go down those who have not felt can come up. You didn’t feel? Three of you should feel it. I don’t know why you didn’t feel. You didn’t feel? No, all right, put your hands like this. You can say, “Shri Mataji, come in our head”. Too much of thinking. Just put your hands. Up there. Put it up. Put your hands up, like that. Like this. Keep the fingers towards Me. Now, how many have felt in the hand or in the head? Let’s see. Raise again. Let’s see. All right, doesn’t matter. It’s good. Now, those who have not felt doesn’t matter. We’ll have got Sahaja Yogis will come and see you. Just be sited. Have patience with yourself. There’s nothing wrong. Have little patience. You felt it? Good, now. All right, it’s good.
Now, those who have not felt, should not feel at all upset. Everybody is going to feel it. Now, you all Sahaja Yogis can go down and let these people… Sir, see this lady, this gentleman, you should feel it . You are such a sincere person. Why don’t you feel it? Maybe.. You felt? But I never saw your hands. So, good, good. I was thinking you should feel it, because… Yes, because you are a seeker, you are a seeker. You are a seeker. These three people should feel. I don’t know why they didn’t feel. They should. They are other set of seekers here. Can you go and see for yourself? Now, those who know Spanish, should actually see, work it out. On this lady. No, just don’t wear your shoes for one minute. This lady. These three people there, didn’t feel it. Please, come. I would like to see you. Three of persons should get it. They should. They are seekers.
Shri Mataji: This lady, this lady. She felt it? You felt it? Now, all right, come along. So, is a good question you asked, I’m happy on that question. All right. Now, come along. Now, just ask a question, ”Mother are You the Primordial Mother?” Let’s see.
Ask a question, “Mother are You the Primordial Mother?” Ask a question.
Lady: Are You the Primordial Mother?
Shri Mataji: Again, “Mother…
Lady: Mother are You the Primordial Mother?
Lady: Are You the Primordial Mother?
Shri Mataji: Now? Feeling it? That’s the answer.
Shri Mataji: That’s the answer. May God bless you. May God bless you. Now, you have to establish it. It’s just the beginning. You have to establish it, all right? You must.
Shri Mataji: May God bless you.
Shri Mataji: Sorry. Oh, Ma, you have to come up this way. Come now. You didn’t feel it? Just these three persons, just see them. They should get it. Just feel him. Did you go to any guru or teacher?
Shri Mataji: Whom did he?
Shri Mataji: That’s it. Not all right. He’s not all right. He’s not all right. Not good. Just put your hand there, on your liver. This side. Now just say, “Mother, I am my own master”. Say it ten times. Better now? Go on saying. You are your own master. Forget all these people, are all wrong. Come along, let’s have it. Better now? Seek, that’s what, you are a seeker, but little bit lost. Now, you’ll be all right. Now, you go and see them, how to get rid of these ideas. May God bless you. I’ll come down. May God bless you. I’ll come there. Would be better. Can you remove this? Just you can remove that. Yes, I think I’ll come down, because it’s difficult for people to come up, all right? You didn’t feel the cool breeze?
Shri Mataji: Hot? Very hot? Now put your hand on the liver. All right? It’s easy. Just forgive. Just say, “Mother, come in my head”. You got it. But you have to work it out, all right? I’ll come there. Just move this chair there.
Shri Mataji: Left side. Put your hand that side. Keep your eyes open. Can you put the candle? Forgive, you must forgive, from the heart. Yes, but you must forgive, because your heart is catching. Forgive, forgive from the heart. Forgive from the heart. Better now?
Sahaja Yogi: He’s feeling it in the hands.
Shri Mataji: All right. Now, say, “Come in my head”. I need some water to put it here. Real baptism I have to achieve. All right I’ll use this one. Now, say “Mother come in my head”. Now is there. Just see yourself. He got it. Better now? All right? It’s cooler now. All right? Much cooler. You are perspiring now. You were not perspiring. It’s better now. All right, sit down now like this for a while. Sit down. To settle it, sit down. You didn’t feel it?
Shri Mataji: You are from what country?
Shri Mataji: Spain? Now, I see. Forgive. Just see. I think you can stand there now. You are cool. Are you feeling it now? That is your feeling. You can keep it there. Say, “Mother come in my head”. Now, see. It’s all right? See now. How? With my hands.
Shri Mataji: It is hot? Now forgive. You are wearing a cross and Christ on the cross forgives, you see. Now forgive everyone. All right? Little bit. Four, five, it’s o.k. On the head you got? Because of the Vishuddhi, because of this maybe obstruction.
Shri Mataji: All right? What’s it?
Shri Mataji: Hot, very hot? Now forgive. You Spanish don’t forgive, is it? Seems everybody has on that chakra this problem. You have forgiven? All right, let’s see. Put your hands. Now, both the hands. Now, forgiven from your heart? You got it My child. Feeling the cool breeze? In the head also now. Just say, “Mother come in my head”. Now, he’s got it, he’s got it.
Shri Mataji:”Come into my head”, say that. All right? You must say it. I’m at your service.
Shri Mataji: Got it? No? Got it? Forgive, forgive. All right? Are you feeling? Say, “Mother come in my head”. You see, too much exertion, that’s why. Come in the balance, then you’ll play even better. Better now? It’s clear. You are clear now. All right? Now, come and see them. Master it. You’ll become a very good tennis player.
Sahaja Yogi: As John McEnroe.
Shri Mataji: McEnroe was a realized soul. All right. He’s all right now? What is she saying?
Sahaja Yogi: She…  They have discovered a tumor in her head. And they will have to operate her and she is asking if You can help her.
Shri Mataji: Let her sit down. Put your left, right hand towards this. Left hand on the tumor.
Shri Mataji: Now, you should come and join these people. You should learn it, all right? You should master it. Lots of you are nice boys, yes? And the young girls too.
Shri Mataji: Feeling hot? Are you feeling hot? Just put your hand like this.
Shri Mataji: Forgive, forgive. Have you forgiven? Close your eyes. Now you got it very well. Let Me see.
Shri Mataji:He’s feeling it in the hands.
Shri Mataji:Not to the head. Now, say, “Mother come in my head”. Please come in my head. Now better. All right? What is the idea, just see, how it has gone down. Just see it. All right? Now master it. All right?
Shri Mataji: Come along. You have been to some guru or someone who had a guru? Now just see how tremendous it is. He’s good. You are cool now. Are you feeling the cool?
Shri Mataji: In the hands? No? Now, forgive. Please forgive. Please forgive everyone. On the Vishuddhi you miss. Please forgive.
Shri Mataji:Madam, how are you? Did you feel the cool breeze? Heat. Heat is going out. Let it get out. You sit down there and do it. Just like this. Ha, now, all right?
Shri Mataji:Now, what is it? Did you feel the cool breeze?
Sahaja Yogi:No, Mother, she has not. She hasn’t felt at all. Are you all right? How is it you couldn’t? Better now, better. Sit there, I think little far away from the fire. Forgive, forgive everyone.
Sahaja Yogi: She, she does some kind of yoga. Hatha? Hatha yoga? She’s from Kundalini yoga.
Shri Mataji: It’s all wrong. What is her age?
Sahaja Yogi: Seventy seven. What does she have to do?
Shri Mataji: She didn’t tell, I tell you. It’s there, there.
Sahaja Yogi: She’s got it. She’s been waiting for You a long time. She feels guilty for nothing at all. Right hand on Mother Earth. It will all work out.
Shri Mataji: Now, what happens? She has a liver problem. Put your left hand on your liver. Now, forgive. Forgive everyone. You didn’t forgive. That’s why.
Shri Mataji: Forgive, forgive, forgive, forgive. Got it? Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Better? Are you better? You’ll get it just now. You’ll get it.
Shri Mataji: Can you come and sit that side?
Shri Mataji: Better now? Cooler? Good. All right. Ah, you don’t try. Just keep it like that.
Shri Mataji: This time Spanish have got it. Because I have said. That’s the reason. Spanish have got it now.
Shri Mataji: Come along Sir. Was This the one asking question? All right? You must forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Maybe Spanish don’t forgive I think. Forgive. What is there not to forgive? What do you do? Better now?
Shri Mataji: It’s cooler now? It’s curable. We’ll tell her how to do it. She should come and ask… All questions finished. Everything done.
Shri Mataji: What’s going on? Very hot. All right. What about you? I think she’s all right. You just watch Me, don’t watch others. You say, “Mother I am the Spirit”. Now believe, that’s the truth.
Shri Mataji: You have got. You got. Right hand you feel? You put your hands in the lap. You put your hand on the heart and say, “Mother, I am the Spirit”. Keep your eyes open. You feel hot? Once say, “Mother, I am the Spirit”. Just once say it.
Shri Mataji: Not all right yet? What’s the matter with you? What is she saying?
Shri Mataji: She’s not feeling anything.
Shri Mataji: Forgive, forgive, forgive. Spanish have to forgive. First forgive Franco. Forgive, forgive, forgive. All right? Everybody angry?
Shri Mataji: He is with Franco I think, that’s why they are feeling hot. Franco is there, then gone to Venice now.