1 January 1979
Letter
London (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Letter translated from Marathi. London 1979.
My dear Sahaja Yogis,
Received your loving and beautiful letters and messages of greetings. Here, I am busy in the work in London and could not write. Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is beginning from Navaratri this year. That is, Satya Yuga, for which you were so far preparing, will now be seen. As a tree has to sprout first in the earth and then its sapling peeps out, in the same way, on the first day of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April the sapling of Satya Yuga will be seen. It is the day of great joy. Whole Nature will now have new life. You must understand that the importance of this day will be known only if the whole mankind is enlightened with vibrations of love. In this world Brahma Shakti was awakened from the very day of My birth. You have received it to some extent, and are using it in many ways. I was telling you that light of that great power of love will spread all over the world. The first lamp will be lit on that day. But night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali-Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit. Whatever is God’s work, it will be over. Hence all should be alert and awake and also awaken others. My life is dedicated to you. Every moment it is working. All I want is that pure gold should enlighten human history while getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga.My blessings are: may this lamp be kindled in every home, may its joy spread in the society, may the cheers of its victory resound all countries and may this power of Brahman fill in every molecule of universe. I have to be away from you for very long time. But your brothers are living here and also in other countries. You will meet each other in course of time. But I often feel that one day of such great joy of love should dawn in our life. Whatever you desire will happen. Therefore, your attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I have offered my body, mind and wealth, everything. You have to take care of only your Chitta because only that will be enlightened.
Always remembering you,Your separated Mother, Nirmala