8 June 1979
Conversation at Maria’s house, Day 1
Maria’s House, Wellingborough (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Sahaja Yogi: Those things were going to happen. Shri Mataji: Yes, for sure, because he is on the supraconscious, the future. He knows from the future, you see, the spirits come and tell him. Sahaja Yogi: Yes. And he knew those things, what was going to happen. By those things happening, he would then be able to manipulate things. Another Sahaja Yogi: He’s having a lot of power in that. Sahaja Yogi: Yes, a lot of power. Shri Mataji: You see, this is the power of the spirits coming on to him, that he doesn’t know. The same spirit will eat him out, bone by bone, flesh by flesh. He doesn’t know these things, what he has done. He is not going to be forgiven, not going to be forgiven. All of them you will see, how they will die, in what circumstances. Sahaja Yogi: Because I don’t think he realizes. You know, he has lost that Realization to realize the possibilities. Shri Mataji: You see, something like, this thing goes in your head, then absolutely, that’s the advantage. That’s a very big advantage that anything, such things you try, goes in to your head, you see. And then you just don’t get a response with yourself, just don’t understand anything. That’s your sign [unsure].
Sahaja Yogi: According to the Quran no guru, no teacher can be either be involved in fame, women, or money. Shri Mataji: You’re not to be involved. Sahaja Yogi: Yes, sex, what I’m talking about, you cannot be involved. Another Sahaja Yogi: [Unclear]. Shri Mataji: Of course not. You see, how can- Sahaja Yogi: And they are all involved in those three things. Shri Mataji: You see, actually, I mean, if you want, I was reading them off [Unclear]. You see, you get detached in the sense you become the personality. You are a detached personality. You don’t know what fame is. You don’t know what fame is. It comes to, you see, you may become famous in a different point, but you don’t know what is fame is. Just don’t care, you know. You just don’t care. The person who is truthful also understands. But the one who is Realized, the one who is going to be the Guru or is the Guru, is the one who just doesn’t care for these things. It doesn’t come into his mind. I’ll give you an example, I won’t [unclear]. There was a one very rich man and his sister was down with cancer, [unclear] got cured. And he was very much interested in Sahaja Yoga and he’s tanksful. He knew and he must help me more, “I give you that much money, I’ll buy you an Ashram”, [Unsure. Very unclear conversation]
I said, “What is the problem?” He said that, “My wife is a person, she’s possessed, she’s got cancer and she is such and such. And I want to have a divorce. And if she says, “Yes, it is like that, my wife, then I can have a divorce. And with that divorce, I’ll make lot of money for myself. But just now we are [unclear]”. You see, somehow or other he tried to make [unclear]. So, very seriously [unclear part]. But the rest of the time I see what it is like [unclear]. I must say, she is very sweet [unclear] And she was herself opined, she came on a plane and she went down there [unclear]. Not that Mark was bad. No, he was also a good person. But some dirty woman must have come in-between you see, and you all have such funny ideas, you must change your wives. Like American people have, you must change your fridge, and you must change your guru, you must change your wives. The change is the sign according to them, a sign of progress or whatever it is. So I think something like that maybe, but it was very serious allegation about her, you see. She was such a fine person.
So and then she didn’t talk about that and he came to see Me. And he said, “Mother what do you think about her?” I said, “She is one of the finest American woman I know. She is a very devoted wife, and don’t go near them, they have a power of their own and I will not touch her by anything. And also he said, “Mother, do you think she’s, she’s not possessed?” I said, “Not at all, you may be, but she’s not”. [Laughter] And he said, “What about, what about cancer?” I said, “She doesn’t have and there’s no possibility of her getting it. She’s a very devoted wife, she’s a very nice person and she loves you. And if you try to have a divorce with her, you’ll be a very miserable person, just don’t do it. It’s not at all good for you. As a Mother I’m telling you that if she’s my daughter and I’m proud of her. All his face fell down.
So I said, you see, [unclear] I had to tell you the truth. Then Randra Chandubhai, he said, “Mother you have no pragmatic approach”. What pragmatic? [Laughter] I said, “I don’t understand the word”. He said, “You should be practical”. I said, “What practical?” They said that, you see, he is willing; why don’t you say- I said, but I said, how come it’s a good thing, right? I said, Chandubhai, do you know, if there’s an innocent person, and if you brand an innocent person like this, you know. Let alone Me, I would never do that. But even if you do that, it is a very great sin which you cannot fill up by giving realization to even one hundred people. He got the shock of his life. He said, “Mother, [unclear]”. “Yes. Now will you do it?” “No, I’m out of it”. You see, after all he is an Indian man, you see, “No, no, no, I’m out of it. We are going out. Mister Mark, got after me, I’m going out. If she is the woman like that, what Mother here said, I’m out”. And like that, you see, the whole thing is fizzling down. Doesn’t matter.
What are we going to do with these buildings? You have to have human beings created. You are the human beings. The temples are to be built of human beings and not of these houses, which are going to crumble down. We have to keep living images to a temple, not these things by which people are impressed for the time being and then, when they die, they say that they never take their names. Such a person cannot, just you see. He just does not bother.
Same about fame. You see, what is fame? It’s nonsense. What is a fame? What is a fame? Just tell Me. I do never understand. Do you understand? What is fame is what is it, you see. Fame, if it means somebody says, “Oh, you’re great, you’re great”, run away from that person. Because, you see, they may be wanting something out of you. They want to use you. Normally, none of the incarnations got fame and they got only stones and restrictions. None of them got it. But there’s only one way Sahaja Yoga is going to do that. Because you’re going to get actualization. You’re going to get the experience of it. That’s why in your heart God is going to reside anyway. This is the way. If you call it this fame, I accept that it should be so. If that sort of a fame is, that you feel that now, you see that, there is a need for the person. It’s the fame which comes out of auspiciousness.
You know auspiciousness is a thing by, is a quality, a personality by which you improve in your being, in every way. In your success, not this worldly success but success that is satisfying. ‘Shri’ means grace that is beautifying. Such a person is auspicious and such a person will have a kind of a fame which is very different from Indian style [unsure], you see.
And the world is going to change, you see. They are not going to have Lord Byron for a statue. No they are not. Or Wellington is not going to be there to drive. We are going to have something else. Now people are going to change, their awareness is going to change completely. They are going to care for people who have that eternal essence in them. They are not going to be for ever.
Another Sahaja Yogi: Mother, I think, when we were all talking about these false gurus, we don’t understand I think one thing, that the sin against the Holy Spirit is the worst and all the worst of the sin. Shri Mataji: You see, it’s very simple to understand. Supposing somebody beats you, you wouldn’t mind. But if somebody beats me, will you be able to detain it in your heart? The same way Christ had said, “It’s all right if you insult me, but if you insult my Mother, I am going to be right on your throats”. There are 11 powers he has got by which he is going to kill such people. It’s very simple to understand. That’s what it is, you are not to insult the Mother of Christ, it’s very dangerous. That’s why he never told anybody that she was the Holy Spirit. She was the Holy Ghost. That’s why he didn’t say it, because that was a protective thing. But she was.
Ask the question, feel the vibrations.
Maria are you busy only cooking? Poor thing. Maria: I just finished. Shri Mataji: Go and help her. She is so sweet and she is working so hard. And will you please go and help her, one girl. Djamel: It’s very logical, isn’t it, Mother? Shri Mataji: Hum? Djamel: It’s very logical, I mean. If he is your son and if he is the son of God, and you must be God. I wonder why the people don’t even see that, you know. Shri Mataji: You see, that’s the trouble. They can see some things, you cannot see. This is maya. [Unclear] This is it. You see something which does not exist and you do not see that it exists, its illusion. It’s the illusion. If you can get, you see, into that state from where you see the illusion, you just enjoy the play. “Oh, the illusion. Ah, ah” You see. Just now as you are laughing at yourself, that’s nice even if the illusion is over. Isn’t it? [Shri Mataji laughing] It’s a big joke, you know. I was also there, one of them.
Sahaja Yogi: Yes, but this is how the whole of maya is, till you got beyond, that way you are able to- Shri Mataji: Yes, I agree, I agree, I do not blame you for that at all, you see, you are the crucified ones.
How to expose them, you see, this is the trick of the maya if you understand. Now, tell me, it is a play, a drama. Now you cannot kill them like that, you see, because they have entered into your heads. So now how do I do it? It’s to put you there. You go into there, you see them and then, you get out of it yourselves. And it would be with a greater force and greater immunity from these horrible gurus.
Sahaja Yogi: Yes, you know, Mahavishnu [name unsure] said something very funny when we were in September, we were over there. He was talking about the story about a Brahmin who had rice. He went to the king’s palace, and on his way out he stole some jewellery and they couldn’t understand why he stole the jewellery. Because he was a saint who stole the jewellery. They discovered eventually that the food they have eaten came from the village of thieves. He returned the jewellery by then, you see.
Shri Mataji: What about him doing that the same? Sahaja Yogi: Yes, and then he said. He said the story looking at me, you see. And afterwards he walked out, because we had just about two hours before, been discussing this question of the money they owe us, you see, what they’ve done. And he said to me as he walked out, “You see?” And it was only four months later that I actually saw what he was getting at. He was apologizing for his own deeds. He then said- Shri Mataji: He was a thief. Sahaja Yogi: People in this room were going to bring down the movement. Shri Mataji: No, no. You see, he is uncapable of apologies. He is not that way. But he was trying to play with you, to say these things and all that, you see. Just to show you and impress you that, “I know what you are talking about” you see. He is a thief and a dirty fellow, you see. I mean, I have no dictionary. I don’t understand what to say, I have no words to say what sort of a man he is. You should really get somebody from Lucknow. There are nice abusers that they use for such people, you see. You know what I can write to someone, write about 21 of them to send him a letter, “This is this, this is this, you are. And this is the mantra you say about yourself that, “I am this, I am that”. [Laughter]
You know, I will tell you, you cannot imagine what sort of a man he is! We had one like that but openly he was like that. You see, once we had a very great swindler, great swindler. His name was Dharam Teja. I don’t know where he learned that swindling, but he met Jawaharlal Rajiv [Nehru] in America. And in these matters, our Prime Minister was very naive, you see. He was very fond of people who were properly dressed in a very, you see, English manner and who spoke good English and we had all the English. I mean he was a Cambridge scholar, you see you can imagine. They should say ‘supa’ for ‘super’ something like that. So that kind of a thing, our Prime Minister was very much impressed with.
So this fellow, went and told him that, “I am doctor, I am this”. “God, English and all . And also our prime minister, they say so, I don’t know, but he could appreciate a good-looking woman very much. So, his wife was very good-looking woman as they say. I have not seen her. I have seen this horrible fellow and he managed him somehow. And then when he went back to India, that time, I’m telling you that I had gone to see my husband at the airport. And you know, for us, they allowed us inside the lounge and all that. And I saw this man with a big hat, woollen hat. So, I asked my husband, “Who is this man?” He said, “Why do you want to know?” I said, “Will you tell me who is this man”.
He said, “Why he is so childish today?” I said, “I’m not childish, I’m anxious to know who he is”. So he said, “All right, I’ll tell you his name. His name is Dharam Teja. And I said, “What is he doing here?” He said, “Why do you want to know about him? Of all the persons, why him?” I said, “Because he’s going to do bankrupt”. “Really?” He said, “Oh God!” I said, “Why? Is he connected with you? He said, “Very much”. I said, “How?” “He’s coming for shipping”. [Laughter]
So, then you know what happened this fellow that he went to Jawaharlal Rajiv and his wife would have a breakfast with him and she used to order a bar, this and that. And you know Jawaharlal Ji was another, as I told you, very naive person and he never understood that this fellow is a crook [unsure].
Then he was given from poor country, can you imagine, 65 crores of rupees to build a machine. But my husband, as soon as his proposal came up, he put down his veto, because I was after his life, you see. So, they transferred him and they gave him a bigger post and they said, “You become chairman of the Shipping Corporation”. And they gave him 65 lakhs of rupees. And the Parliament passed it in re-Prime minister also, was in. 65 crores of rupees were passed to this fellow. And then he bought ships and so-called ships. And he cheated all the big, big, sort of shipyards and all that, never paid them any money. He ordered the ships, he talked to the deputy. And every time he took to the Prime minister there with another deputy Prime minister who is nowadays our Prime minister, a great fellow, you see. Sahaja Yogi: Which one? Shri Mataji: The one who brings the [unclear]. Sahaja Yogi: Desai. Shri Mataji: Desai, Desai. You see, we have lots of buffoons in our country, no doubt. [Laughter] And he took the him there and this fellow, this Desai, was the one who inaugurated in big this thing and naturally you see the poor shipyard people, this Hitachi and all these people who built ships on, couldn’t say anything. Because the Prime minister, deputy Prime minister coming in, garland, get this that. And he is going to launch the ship. They launched the ship and this fellow never gave them the money. The ship was lost permanently. It’s all there! [Laughter] And they had no way of collecting anything. And these are the two great people of our country. Can you imagine! The one who is today the Prime minister and the one who was. And they gave him 65 crores of rupees.
Now, my- this happened and then suddenly the whole thing started to come up, just like this, you see. And then, one man, he found it out. And he leaked it to the government. And he leaked it to the police and all that. And then my husband was in, let me see, he was in Japan and he suddenly came home. I said, ‘”How?” He said, “A stunned thing is happening” I said, “What?” Then they told me that this man was supposed to have killed his first wife, and taken her money and then come to India and did this and that and that with people around. And because of this thing had started off, you see, they found out also about the shipping! And these two great giants of our country, what should I call them? You see. They were saying, you see, “Don’t harass him”. [Laughter] The police is very bad, “Don’t harass them”. They are supporting him all the time, these two. But they were simple. They didn’t take any money from him as such. But then this man was absolutely corrupt. And then he one day just ran away from India, to some place in Panama from where you could not have any extradition. The whole thing was hashed out and all those ships were frozen, all his money was frozen. And still he managed to take away, they said, four crores of rupees out of the land.
But this, the best part of it, my husband says, very seriously to me that, “Do you know the 250 rupees that you have to pay for registration, that also that thug did not pay. Even that, he did not pay! And our great people like Jawaharlal Nehru and Murad Jai were great supporters of him. So, you shouldn’t feel bad of what has happened”. [Laughter]
You see. It is fair. And then he was arrested, he was extracted. He came to London was very fine, he was fine in London. And he was telling stories after stories. Jawaharlal Nehru had died by that. You see, he became absolutely [unclear] and he died [unclear] as he got the shock of his life. But he trusted [unsure] such a foolish man, you see, he went off. If you see his old age photography, he looks like a dazed person, you see. And then this case started in London. And then he said, another drama he played, he said, “You see, these people are all against Jawaharlal Nehru, to give bad name to him, to give blame and this and that. And the judge was listening to him. And he just said, “Now, have you finished? Now I say that you are a crook of the first waters and you are a thug. And you are this and you are that. And now will you shut up!” That’s what they said, the English. I said, “That’s the way it should be said”. And he said, “You take two running jumps and go to Hell! “ [Laughter]
These are the words he used. And then he was in jail. He came out of jail and Indira Ghandi the great, you see, another great lady we had, Prime Minister, she saw to it that he goes out of prison. Now he is out. Shri Mataji: So, are we not sufficiently looted? Sahaja Yogi: Yes. Do you want more examples? Sahaja Yogi: No, no, no. [Shri Mataji laughing] Shri Mataji: Just see, it’s a fact, you see. So, imagine people like that! And at the end, I would not even blame Jawaharlal Nehru for this because he had such a big secretariat with the best, the cream of our country, the most intelligent people. All the intelligence of India was behind this, and they all did, in good faith, you see, the good faith part. And none of them got a single pie.
Hello, how are you? Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Very nice children they are. Come along, Come along, Come along, I’ve been just waiting for you to come down here. Come along, come along, sit down, sit down, sit down. Good, Aha see, the force has come. You see? Vibrations, you just feel the vibrations. All of them are, you see. How beautiful, all of them are Realized. Just look at these children. Beautiful they are. Sahaja Yogini: Brigit, can we sit? Another Sahaja Yogini: Can you remove this and they can sit comfortably. This is just disturbing them.
Shri Mataji: Look at them! Maria who are they? Maria: [Unclear] They come from Birmingham. Shri Mataji: Good, you said there will be only 10 people! Maria, you said there will be only 10 people. [Laughter] Shri Mataji: Good. And the great people have come, you see. These are great people. What’s your name? You must tell your name. [Laughter] What’s your name?
See the eyes, sparkling, look at this see, beautiful they are, aren’t they? Just put your hands like this. Let’s see if you feel the cool breeze, all right? Just like this. She is born Realized. They speak Hindi? What language they speak? Sahaja Yogini: Gujarati. Shri Mataji: Gujarati. “Thaṇḍī lāgē chē”. All of them just see the vibrations. Can you feel them? Seeker: No, Mother. Shri Mataji: Tremendous. They have brought the force with them. Hello. May God bless you. Please come. Please come. Seeker: Very strong, very strong. Shri Mataji: See that. I mean this is what it is. Can you see, can you feel them? Can you feel the vibrations? Bala, you see, this is great. They’ll do the job for me. I don’t have to say anything.
Please put your hands also like this, all of you, just like this. It’s so simple. See now, you feel some cool? In the hand? Yes, cool. Seeker: Very strong. Shri Mataji: Are you feeling all right there, all of you? Are you feeling the cool breeze? See, are you feeling? See you have to be great people to be the Mother of such great children. They are great children. And they selected you as their Mother. There must be some reason for it. Beautiful. It’s beautiful.
Open that window, that window is better. You open that one. That one.
It’s good, from where did you come? Seeker lady: [Unclear] Shri Mataji: Oh I didn’t see, it’s a big change there. That’s another one born realized. Are you feeling the cool breeze? Is your father feeling the cool breeze? Good. See, have more of it and more of it. Let it go inside, absolutely.
They have got cold. [Name unclear] has got cold. Child: Yes.
Shri Mataji: Nice to see you. Nice. It’s beautiful. See you already got it in the hand. So, why should you worry? So many children are born in this country. How do you find it? Better now? Are you feeling better? Better now? Good And the best thing is that you must know the ‘know-how’. Otherwise, you are not to believe anything. Why should you believe anyone who doesn’t tell you the ‘know-how’? They call it science. Do you know, do you have anything, I mean, any knowledge of science, about which you have, you don’t have to know the know-how? In Sahaja Yoga, they will tell you everything. Good. [Unclear]
Maria’s house is blessed many a times. Isn’t it? It’s beautiful. [Unclear part]. Why don’t you sit down Bala? If the chair people can go back, you see, then others can sit in-between. Now all those who are occupying chairs should go to the back. It’s a better idea. So that those who sit in front can see. It is so up, it should be pushed a little bit this side
Hello. Hello. Come along. We have had a very nice session of great laughing. Something like talking about Charlie Chaplin. [Laughter] I think you should put these chairs down or back so that they can see. You are alright, just sit. Just, Gavin?
Just come forward. Just come. They have been having a big laughter. [Conversation while people are getting a seat] Come, come, come. Sahaja Yogi: The train from Glasgow is late. Seeker: Yes. Seeker lady: I’m sorry, it’s late. Shri Mataji: All right. You’re never late with me. Can you sit on the ground? Seeker lady: Oh, yes. Thank you very much.
Shri Mataji: So all the forum is complete? All of them? They are people from… They, they have brought the real force, you see, all of them. Yes, they have brought the thing. Just sit like this with the hands. Just like this, follow me. [Unclear conversation] Are you feeling the cool breeze? Seeker lady: Yes Shri Mataji: Good. You’ve got it already. See, it’s so simple. What about you? You see? Seeker lady: I just washed my hands. Shri Mataji: You see that. Just see. What about you? Are you feeling the cool breeze? Not yet. You will know, if it is there. No sort of, you will feel everything.
We were just laughing about all the things, how they have cheated all of us, and all that. [Shri Mataji laughing] Oh God, and now we know. And now we have to decide and plan out how we are going to outfit all of them. So it’s a plan, we have to work it out.
It has to settled down. It’s an experience which is to be settled down. The Kundalini rises at the first shoot, mostly, if there is no basic problem. I mean, I would say that, as I have told you before, that I couldn’t give Realization to many persons in India at all. With the foreigners not Indians. There is something special about you, that your own Motherland is giving you that power. And it is spontaneous, it is very forceful, and it does happen. But then it settles back. In a sense, it has to look after all the centres and all the problems that you’ve had. So, it comes down. Then you start thinking about it, that’s the point where you falter. You cannot think about it. You didn’t get it by thinking. This one thing you must know, that you did not get it by thinking. You got it because it was to happen to you.
So, if you think about it, it will slow down. You cannot think about it. It is love. What can you think about love? It’s not science. And just now, if you watch your eye, watch yourself, you are beyond thoughts, most of you are. There is no thought. Why? You’ve done it.
Are you too close to that? You find it’s too hot? You can put it off, I think, Seeker: It’s the light, I think. Shri Mataji: It’s just the light, is it? Seeker lady: Yes.
Shri Mataji: Better? Are you feeling the cool breeze nicely? Seeker: I feel great. Shri Mataji: Good.
So let’s talk of something nice now. Let’s talk something about the light. We talked about [name unclear] too much.
[Unclear conversation between Sahaja Yogis] Shri Mataji: Where did you say she has been? Seeker lady: She has a TM mantra. Shri Mataji: God! Seeker lady: She is about a year in TM. Shri Mataji: She has got Rama’s Mantra. Rama’s mantra. Catch in the right heart. You also can feel it. Seeker: Yes, yes, yes. The catch is on this. [Yogis talking] Shri Mataji: That’s the Rama’s. You see, this is Rama’s chakra. I will tell you about this.
So, I will have to tell you about ourselves, what are we. Actually, we know so little about ourselves. This ignorance is responsible for this kind of a problem that you all have faced, you see, because you are so ignorant about it. And the reason is the knowledge about what I am going to tell you, you can only have, when you are a Realized soul. Without that, one cannot talk about it and one cannot explain it to you. Because it is too fantastic. It’s so fantastic that you cannot believe it, and you cannot except it. And that’s why it is not for human mind to conceive it. It goes beyond. If I say that there is God’s Divine Power, which is the most dynamic power, which is the only power that guides this creation, that coordinates everything, that looks after us, and that has made us a human being. You won’t believe it, that there is such a power of God.
All that you see, other things, is absolutely false. It’s just a reflection. It’s not the mirror. And this power has entered into every atom, every molecule and can control all that. We see it every day those things, but we take it for granted. Like we see the flowers suddenly becoming the fruits. How would they become? A mango tree will give you mangoes, it won’t give you roses.
How does it happen? If you see even in chemistry, elements that are created on this earth, have a regular planning about it. They are divided in to exactly eight divisions. Now how all this happens? We never think about it. We take it for granted. We try to find out what we see, what it is, and then we say, “Oh we are great scientists”. But you cannot say how it works. Even if you take a sulphur dioxide, an ordinary atom of sulphur gas. The sulphur atom is on top and there are two oxygen atoms. If you see it under microscope, you can find out that it pulsates, and there’s a kind of a vibration that is passing between these atoms. And these vibrations are of three types. Unequal, equal, dissimilar, also. And who does that? And how, why that certain act like this, some act like that? Even the matter which is a dead thing, which we do not think is capable of having an energy in it. That’s what we used to think. Now of course, you have changed your ideas about that.
That too has such a beautiful arrangement! Even up to the molecule state, up to the atom state you can see how it is mathematically arranged, the protons and the neutrons around us. It is just to see and wonder it. And when you see it in the nature and these elements, their atoms, then you see later on when you start watching, something much more complex, that is a living cell with the carbon coming into it. We just take it for granted. We never bother to know from where did this carbon come? And how, with carbon combination, life came. We just take ourselves also for granted as if we are great kings and that whatever we have got our human life, is our own, you see sort of thing. And we think that if we have this human body, it’s our special right to have it.
Even this eye of ours, if you see, is such a complex camera, how it works instantaneously, how it captures. It’s something beyond our comprehension, so we negate it. We don’t see it. We say, all right, we take it for granted. That’s the way human beings live with it. You see, if you cannot cope with the thing, then what we do is to accept it for granted and leave it. That’s a sensible thing to do.
In the same way, nature has made you specially in such a manner, that you cannot hear certain frequencies. You can only hear certain frequencies. You are created with such beautiful adaptations to nature and surrounding. This Earth is moving with such a tremendous speed, you do not feel. It is spinning round so fast you cannot feel it. But we take all these for granted, and we think we are human beings. But why are you human beings? Why have you become human beings? What can you find out? What did you find out so far? Whatever you can see, whatever is absolutely factual, that you have found out, you have not been able to find out why these things happened and how these things happened. How are you going to find out about such a complex thing that is a human being? You have become a human being without doing anything about it.
And what are you going to do for getting that awareness by which you are going to know yourself? Nothing, nothing whatsoever. On the contrary, effort human beings put, because they have a sense that they can put in effort. But you reach a certain stage later on, that you feel you are putting no effort. It’s just working out, you are just sitting down very nicely, and the whole thing is working out.
Say, for example, there is a relay in London about some programs in the TV. Now it’s all in the atmosphere, you don’t see it. And suddenly you start your TV you get it. What effort have you put in? It was all build-in there. And it was all- whatever was done on the other hand, was also done by somebody. You have just put on the switch and you get pictures, which you do not see normally on the walls nowhere, but suddenly you get them. They are there, existing. But you believe into it, because this, you have seen with your own eyes.
It is an actual thing, that’s why you believe into it. And that’s why you must believe into it, when it’s an actual thing. So, we come to that position where we understand that if anyone talks about higher life, about the power beyond this, then we must have actualization of it. We must feel it. At this point, there is a problem because it is easy to talk about this, that there is a higher life, there is God, and this and his Power working and all that. All this lecture you can hear from many people. Even actualization of it, you see, they may say that jumping like a frog is actualization. Yes! We have had people like that!
You know, in one of my lectures, there was a gentleman who was sitting with both his feet towards Me. And I said, “It’s all right for Me, but I don’t know what’s going to happen to this gentleman, you see “. And then one of the boys went and said, “You are not supposed to sit like this towards Mother”. He said, “You see, I am sorry, but if I sit in any other form, I cannot sit. I start jumping like a frog”.
So I said, “How do you think that this happens?” “It happens every time and if I do it now it will start, like that.” So I said, “But why this is happened? ” “Because my Kundalini has arisen, I am a Self-realized person. “Who has told you this? ” He took out a big book like that, you won’t belief such a big book! And he showed Me, written down there that, “When Kundalini rises, you start jumping like a frog”. I said, “Now who is this gentleman?” “This is some ‘Acharya Brahma’ some sort of a name, such a big name, you see, and horrible person’s photograph on the thing. [Laughter]
Such a big book and this fellow is carrying on his head all the time jumping like a frog. And he says, that, “Yes, you have to jump like a frog”. So, I asked him, “Now when you are going to evolve, are you going to become a frog or a monkey? What are you going to become? This is first thing. You can use your brains for this to understand what to expect, you see. You are not going to become like monkeys, or pigs or even lions. You are already the highest and you have to be something higher. So that will sit out”.
Then the fellow says, another one, who came to Me, and he says, “The best was we had one from Birmingham, is it there? This is David, he is our Sahaja Yogi. He is very sweet otherwise, poor thing. [Laughter] He came yesterday and I said, “What happen David, what where you doing like this and why did you do all these things after coming to Sahaja Yoga?” He said, “There must be some devil on me, on a supraconscious level”. But he said, “Mother, he was so subtle, one of the subtlest one you should understand, that he told me, that you are this and this, and that you will give me Realization and I should go to London. He came in my ears and told me”. Can you imagine? To that extend it was! And so he believed in that kind of a spirit and he was carrying on with it. But I said, “For telling you this, why should you use any spirit? You can read it in ‘Time Out’. You can find it”. Use your brains.
Then we have another one where we think we can purchase, you see, in the market, you see there are courses of yoga. Three weeks course? Seeker: Three years. Shri Mataji: Three years course for shaving off all your property. [Laughter]
So, we go in, you see, for that. Then all such things, one must understand, cannot be anywhere near reality. So what should be expected? What should be the reality? What we call of knowledge of Self.
First, science has given a certain thing which we should try to understand. And if you understand through science, you can understand that, it’s not difficult. Science has given us an understanding that there is a power which we cannot comprehend through our rationality. Even a person like Einstein said that, “I could not find the theory of relativity in the laboratories. I was tired. I was lying down and I was playing with soap bubbles. Imagine he played with soap bubbles. And suddenly the whole theory of relativity dawned upon me”. Because he was a Realized soul. So, it has not come from the laboratories, these people themselves are saying. So whatever knowledge has come to us, has not come through so-called scientific research, but through the grace of some power which has been. Science cannot explain many things!
For example, the science [Hindi about the child]. Bala is very bad. He is not well, that’s why he is upset, you see. All the other children are all right. [Hindi].
For example – [chuckle] so very sweet – they cannot say why so many things happened in the human body. For example, it is said that any foreign body that enters in the system creates a situation by which the body tries to throw it away. But it’s only the foetus which is retained in the womb, nurtured and looked after and thrown away at a time, when the thing absolutely mature. So there is somebody who thinks about it. Then there are two chemicals, chemicals there, are adrenalin and acetylcholine which are secreted in our being at different points. And they cannot explain how these ordinary chemicals sometimes augment and constrict, and sometimes relax at different times. They cannot explain it. So they will say, they are honest. They say, “The mode of action of these chemicals in the human body cannot be explained. They behave differently from their own nature”. So, Baba, from their own nature!
There are many such things which I can I can quote to you and show you, that man reaches a point where he thinks that there is something else which takes the decision. Now when you reach that stage, then you start thinking, that through science we feel that there is something that we cannot explain and that rationality cannot take it up there. So there must be some answer to it.
The answer comes from psychology. I would say, Jung was one of the greatest psychologists ever. He opposed Freud, because Freud, you know, was a horrible psychologist. He was a fellow, who was treating all kinds of abnormal people. He never treated normal people. So he got possessed by them, you see, and he started behaving abnormally. He himself was a very abnormal person. He had very abnormal relationships, and he was really absurd, you see, his own lifetime. And he had a very bad death, he had cancer, he died very badly. But still, all of the Western world worships him. They never see what he achieved in his own lifetime, what sort of a person he was, what was his relationship with other people, and how really, he was very anxious, always taking pills, and he died of terrible cancer. And in a very wretched condition, he died. While Jung, in his old age, he got his Realization and he was of a very different nature. And when he died, he used to look, he was looking like a flower. But people do not see all that, they just see what he writes. And because it suits them to listen to Freud, I don’t know why it suits them. Actually, it should not normally.
So Mr. Freud has come up. And I would say Jung if you want, you would find out that this great man has done so many experiments with thousands of people, and has established, and has established that there are forces beyond us, forces beyond us which control. And the forces beyond us which control us, he called them as Universal Unconscious. ‘Unconscious’ because they are not in our conscious mind. And he called them as, also as – you see, he actually, did not know how to name it. So, he said that, he has said it, “It is the Mother’s force, it is a motherly force”. Very clearly, he has said it. And he studied also Indian, also, Indian literature and all that. And he has developed some thought on Shakti cult also. So, he has used the word Shakti for the Universal Unconscious.
But still he was just a Realized soul. There was no Mother to tell him all about it, what it was. So he could only indicate and tell you that there is a universal unconscious which is guiding you. He experimented with people with their dreams. There is a very famous dream, which he interpreted, about a man who would always dream that he has to bow to his own son. His son is sitting on a pedestal, and he has to bow to his son. The son might be a Realized soul. So he came to him and he said, “I don’t know why I get such a dream”. So Jung asked, “What is your relationship with your son?” He said, “Very, very bad”. I said, “Why?” He said, “I am, you see, his mother is dead and I married again. And my wife is very angry with him and I really don’t know what to manage, how to manage it. The relationship has gone very bad”. So, he said, “The Unconscious is telling you that you must bow to him. He is of a higher awareness, so you must bow to him. It is giving you a balance.”
Then there was another girl who came to him with a dream. I mean, to just to put two dreams together, I am telling you. She said that, “I see my mother as a witch”. So he asked the girl, “What is your relationship with your mother? ” She said, “It’s very fine, very good. She actually pampers me. She has pampered me so much that I am just good for nothing.” He said, “That is the thing is coming to you from your unconscious to suggest that your mother is a witch who is spoiling you”. And there are thousand and one like that, you see. There are so many volumes of Jung which you can read for yourself. So, the psychologists have told us that the state of human awareness would reach at a point, where he will be thoughtlessly aware. He will be aware, but there won’t be any thought. This is said by Jung who was a psychologist. So we should know what we have to expect.
Now there’s another source which is very clear, and very, very built in, which we can understand, are the scriptures. If you read John’s Revelation, you can read about all these things. You will know that the cool breeze is to be expected. If you read Shankaracharya, of course, I need not say much more, because he is the one who has completely exposed the whole thing in the sixth century [i.e. in the 600s]. This knowledge was a secret knowledge before that, because the evolutionary process had not taken its proper course. It was kept a secret knowledge, a guarded knowledge for very few. Only in the 6th century, he started exposing it. Then Kabira and Nanaka, all these people came out with full exposition of Kundalini.
The greatest work done on Kundalini was in Maharashtra, where Nathas, the 9 Nathas, the primordial masters, they call themselves, worked on it. And also in other places, they also came from Punjab. There was a big rapport between Punjab and Maharashtra. And they went into the forest, meditated and religiously tried to find out what was Kundalini, what was the force, what was the seed within us, what was the germinating force that is going to give us this. Because only one or two were Realized, whenever they talked about Realization, nobody could believe them, and couldn’t understand. There is a force like that and they said, “Oh, please, keep us, we are happy with ourselves”.
Moreover, the people who were Realized had such bad experiences of all these people. Like they were beaten up, crucified, they were poisoned. I mean, imagine the people! What was there to crucify Christ? I still can’t understand.
So, the very sensible people of this world looked at all these explanations about God and Divinities with that kind of a hostile attitude. And there was no way of changing this attitude of these people. And this hostility was expressed even by religious organization. You see, anybody who was a Realized soul was thrown away from churches, from temples. These brahmins killed them, they tortured them. The last one that we had was Shirdi Sai Nath. And if you see how the brahmins from Nagar area, from Ahmednagar, how they tortured him, you would be surprised. Not only that, they brought a snake charmer with a snake to kill him. But he got hold of the snake and talked to the snake, you see snake went away and bit charmer. [Laughter] Then he was the one who got up and saved the charmer. And he told him, “Don’t do all these things”. He said, “I would not, but these people brahmins have given me money”.
So the people who were supposed to be in charge of religion themselves crucified those saints who talked of reality. And that’s how reality was completely blinded. Nobody could see it and people were gagged. This was the problem. And that’s why somebody had to come and do this to give en-masse Realization to people, so that it becomes a common knowledge. Everything that is discovered by one person has to become the common knowledge. Otherwise, it has no meaning. Even in the science you see, you find out about electricity, it has a big history behind it, whatever it is. But at a point, it has to become a common knowledge. If it is not a common knowledge, it will never be accepted and it has no value at all. It has to become a knowledge of every human being otherwise it has no meaning. And the time has come for you to have the actualization and to have the complete knowledge of your being, what you are, what you are going to be, what you could have been, what are the problems around.
And that’s why somebody had to come and do this to give en-masse Realization to people, so that it becomes a common knowledge. Everything that is discovered by one person has to become the common knowledge. Otherwise, it has no meaning. Even in the science you see, you find out about electricity, it has a big history behind it, whatever it is. But at a point, it has to become a common knowledge. If it is not a common knowledge, it will never be accepted and it has no value at all. It has to become a knowledge of every human being otherwise it has no meaning. And the time has come for you to have the actualization and to have the complete knowledge of your being, what you are, what you are going to be, what you could have been, what are the problems around.
So, in us is placed a germinating force. We are all built in it. It’s like a computer, absolutely living computer within us is placed through our evolution, one by one, step by step. All these points have been properly put down in our backbone, in our brain and in the limbic area here, absolutely in a perfect manner. And only thing one has to do is to surrender, to accept it. But we’ll surrender to all kinds of nonsensical things, but to the right person, our ego will immediately stand out, you see. If somebody has two hearts, it is very easy to surrender. Or if somebody is very cunning, very easy to surrender. But where do you surrender, is to the Divine force, to yourself, to your wisdom. What do you surrender is your nonsensical idiotic ego. What do you have to surrender to God? What do have? Only this known knowledge which has come to you through ego and sometimes through these possessions which is the superego.
Now for surrendering, people think, “How can I surrender?” Now you cannot think about it, “How should I surrender?” Can you work it out on a paper, “I will do this, X plus X is equal to so much. It’s very simple: how do you love? Do you sit down and make a picture? Now I’m going to love my child, so I will make a lap with this much angle, and this much angle, and the baby there at this angle, look at her with this angle. Then I’ll turn left, right, then again I’ll put the child this side. Do you do like that?
You know how to love, don’t you? It’s built in. Surrendering is nothing but is the love of God that is within you. He is within you in your heart. He is there. All the scriptures have said that and none of them are wrong or false. They might have been misinterpreted somewhere, everybody has their tricks, you see. Our tantrikas in India, all of these who are nowadays gurus were tantrikas once upon a time, in the 6th century. They entered into all kinds of things. And the worst thing they entered into are the Vedas themselves, you see, where they declared that even I think, like Ashwami Yidiyadhya, which is a very pure thing, is also oriented from sex, as they said.
Even they said that the God and the Goddess, the God and His Power are sex relationships. I tell you they think that human beings are nothing but sex points. They have nothing else in them. Even an amoeba has something more than that. [Laughter] But we accept them. Why? Because we are seekers. We are simple. And we are seeking. We are born in this world to seek. We have taken our birth specially at this time so seek. We have been seekers all our lives, and today we want to seek. And how are we going to seek? Wherever we get a chance, we run through. I know, it is hard to understand that you don’t have to do anything, just sit right. The boat is moving and it will take you to the other end. You don’t have to do anything else.
It was going to work out, this is how tree has to mature. Now the flowers are there, they attract the bees, the bees come at the right time. They blossom at the right time and also the fruits appear at the right time. It has to mature. It has to take its own course and time. The way you are built in, you are made, it has to complete itself. So then another round starts. And that’s why this hurrying up has blossomed today. That’s all, nothing more than that. And it is very easy to correct yourself. There is no problem about it. It’s very easy, because once you have light within you, you will start seeing everything very, very clearly. Because there is no light, it becomes so difficult.
Have you tried climbing up steps without lights in any new house which you have not been? Three times you’ll fall down before you get over one, like that. But if there is light, whatever type of the house may be, wherever you have been, you can just go up there and just like that. In the same way, unless and until you are enlightened, unless and until you are Realized, unless and until you have that power flowing through you, you cannot understand, and you cannot see that how simple it is. And you are so beautifully built in your previous searches, that once you get this awakening within you, you start awakening others immediately, and you can start it on somebody else. But you see, just now, it’s such a powerful thing, that most of them have got it. So, I don’t know where are you going to try. Most of them have got it. You see, sometimes it happens like that. So, whom are we going to raise? “Now, Mother, everybody is Realized “. [Shri Mataji laughing] [Laughter] She’s got it too. You see that’s the problem. That it is so powerful. But you will find that it will settle down again. It has to go back because we have got chakras within us, the centres, which are being exhausted. That I would say, now this side is the left side and this side is the right side. And both sides are the sympathetic nervous system. Right side sympathetic nervous system works for your mental being and for your emotional being- mental being and for your physical being. And the left side for your emotional being. In-between is the central path, is the parasympathetic.
Now the underlying subtle energies that control these two, left and right, the left one is controlled by the power which we call as Mahakali’s power, which is ‘aim’. Then the ‘hrim’ and the ‘klim’, you see. The ‘hrim’ is the central power, ‘ra’. Ra is energy. Hrim is the one which gives you evolutionary powers and also sustenance. Like carbon had its own sustenance, and like gold has its own sustenance, as you have your own sustenance. Everybody has the sustenance through this central power of ‘hrim’. It’s the power of Mahalakshmi. And the right hand-side power is the power of Mahasaraswati.
Now you shouldn’t get upset with these Sanskrit names. It has nothing to do with any particular community or anything. Because these were found out by saints who were meditating in India and they knew Sanskrit language. That’s why they are Sanskrit names. Moreover these days also science has developed here, but also in India a kind of a science developed, and the science that was developed in India was the science of Kundalini. It’s the force of the germinating power, the residual power within us. And this science has seen or has actually experimented with the movement of the Kundalini when it moves, the sounds it makes, and these sounds are different on different centres within us, which are seven basics. But there are 11 otherwise and there are three – how much is it – three hundred and fifty million. So this is the thing, three hundred and fifty million but we deal only with seven at the most with ten. Not more than that. Because it’s too much of an idea.
Why should you worry? We need not worry, now you are sitting in this room, it’s all right perfectly well. Why should you worry from where this electricity has come? And from how much of drops it must have taken to create this much of electricity? Is it from the water or from the coal or what is the history or else? Who is bothered? You just put on the light and enjoy it. They have done it for you. It’s all done. In this also you must take it for granted that it’s all done for you, and you have every right to have it.
So this Kundalini, when it passes through all these various chakras, it makes a sound. And that sound has been taken by those people in the ancient days, as the phonetics, phonetic sounds for forming the Sanskrit language. That’s why Sanskrit is used for controlling the Kundalini, the movement of the Kundalini. And the centres that are within you have got a mark, a landmark of your evolution. For example, the leaders who came at different stages of your evolution where actually the incarnations of Divine Power, and they have left a mark within you and they exist within you at that particular center. So when you say a particular mantra, that deity opens up and starts emitting energy. But still, human being without Realization is a limited energy. His deities have limited energies. But if he is put in connection with the All-pervading Power through Realization, then his deities are also emitting. Like if you have a car and you have a limited petrol all right? And the petrol shortage is there too. Then you put heart into tension and you do not know what to do. But supposing there is a permanent pipe on the cap of the patrol tank, you see, which is filling it permanently, then you don’t have any tensions. You are not bothered what is the exhaustion.
Now this exhaustion on all these centres, because these are the underlying forces of all the plexuses that we have outside. When they get exhausted, the plexuses that are acting our body, our mind, our thinking, our emotional activities, all of them get exhausted and then we develop diseases of various types : physical, mental, emotional. So to make these centres awakened is a very important thing, even from a day-to-day lifestyle. Like you must fill them up, you must awaken them so that at least your health is all right, your wealth is all right, you mind is all right, and also your emotions are all right. This is the basis.
But ultimately, what do you get? Ultimately, you get that connection which is all the time forwarded. Not only that much, like unless and until you get this connected to the mains, you cannot work it out. It may be very nicely made, what to do then? So, the first thing is put it to the mains. When you put it to the mains, then only you will realize also where is the problem. Otherwise, you will not know. But when you get your Self-realization, you know your problems, you know yourself. This is the first thing. That is Self-realization. You know your centres how they are affected, where they are affected, what is the problem there, and you get the power to cure them.
Of course, thoughtless awareness is there, no doubt. But plus that, immediately, a person whose Kundalini has crossed Agnya, only Agnya, may not even get Realization, can cure others. That’s how we have half-baked curing people. So, mostly then they get possessed and they get spiritualists, you see. Their Kundalini only rises up to Agnya, and some spirit comes into them, they become spiritualists.
But you people, even if it crosses Agnya, immediately you can start curing. When it crosses Sahasrara, this point, the last point, then you enter into that area, or into that subtle awareness which is all-pervading.
Just now we think that, “You are different, she is different, she is different”. But there’s a thread passing through you. If your attention becomes that thread, then you can pass into anyone. That’s how though you know yourself, you know your problems, everything, you also know others, immediately. That is what is the Collective Consciousness about which Jung also has indicated. So you have to expect Collective Consciousness that is, is an actualization. That is that your consciousness, your awareness gets that dimension in actual form, that you become that.
To explain it, I will tell you. Like animals walking through dirt and filth, they never feel any dirt or filth. They cannot see beauty. But we can. We cannot walk through dirt and filth. Our awareness is very different from that of animals. In the same way, when you become this, then your awareness becomes so beautiful, that you start feeling the sin. You start feeling the wrong. I don’t have to tell you. You may not just do it. I don’t have to tell you, automatically you started feeling what is good for you and what is bad for you. Say our Rustom has not come. I never tell, “Don’t drink”, like a Muslim. You know, I don’t. Nothing. “You go ahead, have cancer and have everything nicely, then come to Me. Have your liver absolutely shattered, be a drunken fellow, then you come to Me. All right, doesn’t matter”.
Then the Realization takes place, immediately the priorities change within you. Absolutely. You’ll be amazed, I have seen people who have been terrible drunkards, you see. They said, “Mother, we can’t drink”. I said, “What happens?” “We vomit”. Same thing happened with Rustom. He started vomiting and he couldn’t take, you see, I never told him. Then you just enjoy something else, because if you get the nectar of life, then you don’t run after frivolous things, useless thing. Your dignity becomes different. You become different. It’s entirely different. Your sense of enjoyment is so different. You become really beautiful flowers, and the fragrance people can see from a distance, even from a telephone. It’s so dynamic and that is what it should happen to you.
For that what should we do? People say, “Mother what should we do?” Nothing, just ask Me. You have to ask Me and to knock at the door, that’s all. Even if you do not knock, your Mother is going to knock at your doors. She is very persuasive. She will come to your house, make you comfortable, she’ll massage your body, she’ll massage your head and she’ll massage your back, work on you, and she’ll see to it that she takes you out. She has too much patience. And you will be amazed, that, if I am tired I feel better when I bring you to that level.
Like this Patricia came once, she said, “Mother you do so much for us, you’ve done so much and let me, I must do something for you”. “So what can you do? ” She said, “I’m very good at massaging the feet”. I said, “All right, do it”. She was massaging my feet and her feet were massaged. And she couldn’t understand this! And she was feeling relaxed, she was massaging my feet, you see. I said, “What’s happening? ” She said, “It’s not surprising. I’m getting relaxed, while I’m massaging your feet”. So that’s what it is. But you must know that you cannot give Me anything. I’m here to give and you are here to take. That’s your right to take it and you’ll have it. It’s your own. It’s like a mother who loves you such a lot, and she has such a lot of properties. Everything is your own. Just take it, just have it. You see, the greatest pride for any mother should be that she sees her children try their own power. And then they achieve their own power, and render it to other also. And they become the joyous, happy, blissful children.
That’s the way I see my dreams, and I’m sure the time has come for Realization, I’m sure, I had to come to London and they’ll have lots of Sahaja Yogis in there.
India is a place, it’s full of good vibrations, no doubt, because we have had great saints coming, even Christ was there. But it’s like, when you have the teeth, you don’t have food to eat, and when you have food to eat, you don’t have teeth. Like that is the situation. While here you are the saints and born in this country and you are misguided. And there we have people who are not seeking and they have the vibrations. This is the real advent of Sahaja Yoga.
They think, you know, so many of them think that you people are seeking because you are upset with too much of machine oriented, you see, that’s all. They think, it’s more- your seeking is more like a remedy for ills that you have got in you. They do not think that you are seeking something so deep, and that there is a seeking of love. They do not understand. But in India also, I must say, Sahaja Yoga has clicked very fast. And once the fire has started, it’s going very fast, you see. And how somehow it works, it’s so interesting, it’s so interesting that you think, [unclear] so fast to do that?
Like in Delhi, we had a program of opening this book, releasing this book for the first time. And they said, “I see now this will be too much for Me, how will I manage?” You see I have never done that sort of a thing. They said, “No, no Mother, you have to just give a lecture, that’s all. You think it’s Sahaja Yoga program and then we look after the rest of it”. So the President of India, you see, was somehow cured by Me and all that. And so they wrote to the President of India, land he was to come. Luckily he never turned out, that’s a good idea. So they said, “Mother we can’t get him. So why not you become the President of India?” I said, “If you think I’m all right, I don’t mind becoming the President” you see. And the whole press was there, all the members of Parliaments, everybody very critical and all the things. Can you imagine? We had taken the, they were taking a hall for two hundred people, and I said, “No. Now just take for eight hundred”. They said, “Will it fell up?” I said, “You just take for eight hundred people”. And they, all these people came, I don’t know with what ideas they came there, but there was no place even on the, in the passages, to move. People were sitting in the passages. And I said, “Look at this, a new phase is coming up”.
And I said something which I’ve never said before. I have used lot of tact in this life of mine because people don’t want to hear anyone. Like Christ, what did he say that, “I am the light, I am the heart”, which he is. This is not egoistical, is it? Do you think so? I mean if you are something, now if I am Nirmala, I should say, “I am Nirmala”. Is it egoistical?
Like Krishna has said, ” Sarva dharman parityajya maam ekam sharanam vraja” [Gita, 18,66]. You have all these dharmas, and all these- like religions. He doesn’t mean the religion within, but what he’s saying, there are all sorts of sustainers that you are observing. Just come to me and surrender, so that you go beyond all these sustainers. Was He egoistical? But He was very tactful. He didn’t tell the masses. He told only to Arjuna. Nobody else but somebody who had an eye and ear to hear that, heard it and looked it out. But Krishna never told it to the masses, no. Christ did that and what did you do to him? He didn’t do any harm, did he? Just for this sentence?
So, I’ll be extremely tactful. I am very elusive by nature. So don’t be taken up by my words of doubt. [Unclear]. I’m elusive, that’s the only way I can approach you. People have tried all sorts of things. Like Krishna’s, you can say diplomacy, then Christ sacrifices. Now mine is the style of elusiveness. Because if I were not, you would not come to Me. First of all, I must appear just like you, which I do not so much sometimes. But most of the time, I do. And I should be thinking just like you, absolutely, and you will never know. In your hearts of hearts, you may know. But the illusion will be all the time maintained so that you receive it fully, completely and you master it without feeling any awe about Me. You have to be absolutely free, absolutely free. And I assure you all the protection will be there. [Inaudible] They are Me.
And I am quite surprised the way you can manifest your powers. I hope this great country, England, which I have said again and again is the heart of the universe. You must understand Heart has to stand up for reality, and has to fight these standards so that you prepare for the advent of the last terrible One, who is going to come with his eleven destructive powers and just going to sort it out. There is no persuasion, no Realization, no knowledge, nothing, just sort it out. Before that you have to save all your friends, save all the people and salvage them. And you are the warriors. You are the people who are going to do it. I’m just in the background. I don’t do anything. I talk that’s all.
Regarding all the different deities – [aside], I mean, what chart [unclear] is there or not? Sahaja Yogi: The chart [unclear]. Shri Mataji: And the centres and all those things, you haven’t got. Sahaja Yogi: I’ve got some [unclear] a little one. Shri Mataji: Which one? Sahaja Yogi: You know, the printed ones. Shri Mataji: So, just let see them what pictures you have. Now you can get your second style [unsure], all right, and you can see for yourself what are the centres and how they are represented on your feet. When you are Realized, you can start feeling it. For example, these children had cold, you see. So, I started feeling burning on the right hand, not that I feel, but you would start feeling also. Seeker lady: [Unclear]? Shri Mataji: With the cold the children had, you see, and it’s working out. This is the center of Vishuddhi. And when there is cold, you feel it on the right hand, it’s the physical as I said. On the left hand, it is then the person feels guilty. Mostly he may be a Catholic. [Laugher]
It’s very interesting, you know, to find out about the people. And you are amazed when you discover it. Like Gavin, you know. One day, he was worried about his father, that he not [unclear] that he had to do a phone call. Why do you worry? Just see the vibrations. This is telecommunication absolutely. So, he said, “Mother I am getting heat here “. I said, “That’s your father’s. You see, This is all father, this is your mother”. I said, “All right”. “So he’s got something wrong with his bronchi. Must be bronchitis or something “. So he rings up home and the mother says that, “You see father has had very bad bronchitis starting problem”.
He saw even Nixon going into problems, you see. He could see him long time back before it happened, you see. A person may appear to be very great, a very big saint. Just put your hands. You will know what sort of a fellow he is. Your vibrations will immediately stop or you will get tingling, sometimes burning, sometimes you have blisters. It’s that bad. You yourself, you are the instrument. You are the one who diagnoses it. You are the one who cures it. This is the power of Self-realization. Is there any question?
Seeker lady: Yes. I’ve got thousands of questions I want to ask. I’ve got thousands but what you’re talking about Peter and David told me this about your own self. What is the relationship between the Self-realization that you are able to give almost immediately and enlightenment in the sense of being free from the wheel of karmas. Do you see what I mean? Shri Mataji: Enlightenment means what? Seeker lady: Well in the sense of being free from the wheel of karma. Do you see what I mean? Shri Mataji: Well, Immediate. Immediate release. What is karma? You see, this is also a theory you must understand what is a karma is. Karma, who does the karma? It’s your ego. What karmas do you do? Nothing.
It’s your ego that gives you the sense that you are doing. You don’t do anything whatsoever. I can tell you. It’s the ego within you which does it. Now the ego is here, like this, you see, rises from the right, goes like that. And superego is like this. When the Kundalini rises, both are sucked up and your attention is above the ego. When you laugh at it, “Oh Mr. Napoleon and how do you do sir?” The karmas are dissolved because you have no ego. It’s like this, very simple. Is say- when the sun is on the side, you can see your shadow. All right? But when it comes on your head the shadow disappears in you. It’s something very simple.
Seeker lady: But one is sort of when you really, well, in the Eastern scriptures because you know the Western scriptures have no reincarnation. One is sort of led to believe that this is something that takes a long, long time. Shri Mataji: That’s how they must do it. You see all of them are like that: thugs. So what they have to – they have to make you believe into something. You see, otherwise how are they going to say why you don’t get it. That your karmas. Then why are you there? You see, what I would say that, “What are you doing there, collecting our money?” Simple question. You see if it is our karmas by which we are suffering, you are the one who are cleansing.
There’s one very wonderful one in Bias. He said, “I take only one upon hundred and something of your karmas”. I said, “Why this mathematics? Why not the whole of it?” And then he says, “You see, for the rest of it, you have to work hard. And what is working hard is service”. What is service? Big, big trunks, you see. And there’s a big – what you call- a piggy bank, you see, pigs like that. And the piggy banks is the service. And people from all over the world come there for that service, and that cleansing there. You see, they’re befooling of it [unsure].
Seeker lady: I want to also put it another way around that you said earlier something about we come to you as it were for some reason. Is it that in the past we have done something to show the merit coming to you? Is it like that? Because it seems, it’s always too easy you know. Do you see what I mean? Shri Mataji: Why should it be difficult? Now I’ll tell you one thing, very simple it is. See your breathing is so easy isn’t it? Did you consult any book or did you find out about karmas? Because it is so important for you. In the same way your evolution is very important. If you are not evolved, the creation will have no meaning. It has to be the simplest of all. ‘Sahaja, spontaneous’. How can it be difficult just think of it? It has to be the easiest.
Seeker lady: But I’m not going to let people off lightly, I’m sorry. The thing is, I’ve always felt that if my life is difficult, it’s because I’ve done things wrong in the past, which have made it like that. Shri Mataji: You see now. Seeker lady: It seems unlikely that my life is suddenly going to change. Shri Mataji: Oh, this is an old trick they have tried with everyone. Like your priest telling you, “Come and confess something”. Now those who have not done any sin, what are they going to confess? “So, then why not something? One must have done something, otherwise, I have to face the priest what am I to tell him? ” Then ultimately, the priest lands up in the lunatic asylum also. You go and tell him, “I confess, I confess” all nonsense.
It’s like in India, you see, we had a priest coming to our village, you see, and he started teaching them about Christianity. When he was going the head of the village, you see, didn’t know how to thank him. He said, “Sir we are thankful to you for visiting our village. You have really enlightened us, because we did not know what was sin. Now we know what is sin”. [Laughter] It’s like that, you see, for this enlightenment only in modern times you have to pay. It’s so simple. They have done the difficult work. Christ has done it all. What sin can you commit my child, which is greater than the love of God? Tell me one.
Seeker lady: The thing is that, if things do go a bit wrong for once. If things do tend to go a bit wrong. If one can somehow say, well it must be my fault in the past, then you don’t feel bad towards anyone else. Whereas if you feel that you are blameless and things still go wrong you tend to blame other people at least you see what I mean… Shri Mataji: You see we are like this: either we destroy others or destroy ourselves. Must we do that? We need not destroy others and destroy ourselves also. We are neither guilty nor we are putting guilt on others. Can’t we be in between? I mean, can’t we be sensitive? Seeker lady: We are just an agent. Shri Mataji: It’s just we are destroying ourselves by feeling guilty. We are destroying ourselves by that. You see. It’s a self-destruction, you see. Actually, this ego-oriented society came up to a point that, when ego became too much ego, so just to counteract it, you see, you started with a superego. And superego is that, “Oh, you are an egoistic fellow, and you are no good and you are so horrid. You will be responsible for Vietnam, for Indiamen for all Bedel Bokassa”. Everybody you’ll identify with and you will feel guilty, why you are a beautiful person.
Either you will feel proud of it, and egoistical, or you will feel guilty about it. Now what am I to do? You just think of Me, also. It’s a funny situation and it is not true. It’s not true. You are neither guilty of anything, nor you are to be wrong because whatever is, is that. And there is no guilt which God cannot take upon himself. Because you are very sweet people. That’s why you are guilty. [Laughter]
Seeker lady: Then one comes back to the old question of you know, why did God create a world which has suffering in it? I mean this is a sort of classical question. Shri Mataji: All right, all right. I’m going to answer this one. The classical one also I can answer, it’s very simply. Now why did you have a child, first? In the same way, God has his own child. His creation.
This feeling to have a child has come to us from God itself. As we want to have child, he wanted to have a child. He wanted it to grow, mature fully. And then he wanted to grow with all his powers to that child to enjoy and see for himself. This was just a play of God. His whim, we can say, his pattern of feeling that he wanted to express, that he created you so beautifully, and then he created the whole universe so beautifully. Everything so beautiful for you to know the beauty of him.
Seeker lady: So now has come the moment of maturity. Is that why it is so easy to get that? Shri Mataji: Yes, yes. This is the time of blossom time. Yes, of course. Like, you see, you can have only one or two flowers, all right, in the beginning of the tree. It’s very difficult to protect the tree. And all that was done, you see. Now it’s all come up. The blossom time has come. And at the blossom time, you do not have to bother, you have to become a fruit. That’s all. You have to become that.
Seeker lady: How do you know that this is the time of the fruit? Shri Mataji: Because it’s happening. How do you know it’s the fruit time because there are fruits? You can see the fruits. You should also see those who have become fruits, how they are fruits. And you become the fruit, and see for yourself how you become the fruit or not.
You can see thousands of them. You can come with Me sometimes to India to see in the villages, thousands of them experience that, feeling the cool breeze. But feeling the cool breeze gradually has to be understood and to be practiced and seen for yourself and mentally to be accepted for Western mind, not for an Eastern mind, because we know cool breeze means that. They are not to be told, but for a Western mind, you have to see for yourself what it does, how it works, how it clears out, how it, what it is, how it is.
So, I would say that you get your Realization very fast because of your past. But you settle back again, unsettled, because of your present.
In India, you cannot get Realization very fast. Because, I think, they must have been the ones who must have been in England long time back. The ones who seemed to be blasted, those who are born in India now, who are trying to rule and develop our country to a new Western world, you see. So, and you have the real idea about past, but the present has been quite [inaudible] or dangerous, you see. That’s why the problem is there. So it settles back, but it doesn’t matter. With many, it does not also. I’m just telling you for precaution. Because what happens among ten people, the one who is supposed to be the most, you see, dominant, he settles down first. Being dominant, he dominates others and they also settle down again. You see, because the people who are very dominant by nature, always assert influence on others.
So, the one whose Kundalini goes down is the one who is really dominating, you see. He might be possessed or it might be something wrong there, maybe any sort of person. But that person will dominate others. And the others will take lessons from that. It’s human nature, you know, it’s very funny, how they go to lunatics for training, same people going to lunatics. What do you say to that person? I would like to ask certain questions also. Do you want Me? How do you do certain things? I can’t understand, you know. I just can’t understand. You see a man going to the pub, coming out, falling down, getting hurt, and you go into the same ditch. [Laughter] How do you do it? So many things, you know, I would like to ask sometimes to human beings. But by the time I ask, you become Realized, so I cannot ask you because you are different. [Laughter]
It works so fast and because it works fast, are you going to deny it? It’s all promised, all promised in all the scriptures. For instance, if I say now, “I have a diamond with Me here”, specially to Indians, will you say that, “How can it be that simple? ” You’ll say, “Better have it”, isn’t it? Indians, I would say, [inaudible] about you. Seeker: You know, the techniques that we’ve been doing, we’ve been told that it’s so difficult to get there, that there’s so many working, there’s so many things that have got to do. Shri Mataji: No, the trouble is, the techniques – Seeker lady: But actually, I would say. Shri Mataji: I will tell you. The techniques they will tell you are difficult, otherwise that’s the way they exist. Seeker lady: But in fact, we were told the techniques were easy, but in fact, our karmas were the problems. That’s even more contortive. This is what led us to think of ourselves as one and others. Shri Mataji: No, forget about them. They have befooled you completely. That’s all. It is, simple. In simple words, absolutely, it’s unique and disturbing [unsure]. Thank God you have come to this point to listen to Me at least. Otherwise, you would have beat Me for saying this. You see, the techniques that are telling you has no meaning, nothing. “You need ordinary [unclear]”, it is said.
Now Shankaracharya himself said, “No, yoge, na, sankhi, na”, by any method you cannot get it. Only through the Mother’s grace you are going to get it. And in his last book, you see, he wrote all this ‘Viveka Chudamani’, this, that, and all these duties he gave and in the end he just praised the Mother. That’s all. ‘Soundarya Lahari’ is nothing but the praise of the Mother. Of course, he was very clever. Every stanza has a mantra in it. But he just praised the Mother and people asked him, “What’s this? Such an intelligent man like this! He’s just praising the Mother. He said, “That’s sufficient”. That’s the way it has to be.
Seeker lady: But if there’s any moment of praise with God, you would think that, if you’re saying that TM questions of the wrong road, then somebody in TM would be fairly justified or feel fairly justified and say that you’re also the wrong road. So, how does one know? Shri Mataji: Yes, that’s it. You see, now you should judge it by certain things, you see, what is the wrong road and what is the right road. I told you the whole lecture was about it, isn’t it? I told you how to find out. Did he give you your own power? First question. Did you get your own power? Means, did you have any powers flowing through you? Seeker lady: No idea at all. Shri Mataji: No idea at all? Then can you make out what’s wrong with him in collective consciousness?
Seeker lady: I know that I had more power before I did TM. As a child, I had much more power than I have now. Shri Mataji: That’s it. That’s it. That’s it. But apart from that, today when you’ll get your Realization, you will know what’s wrong with him, what’s wrong with them, what’s wrong with her. You can cure it, improve it. You can see with your naked eyes the Kundalini, about which people have talked, pulsating in your presence. Yes, you can see it, I can show you now also, with your own eyes. Did he do that? Seeker lady: No. Shri Mataji: Only thing he did was counting your money. [Laughter] But his nephew was managed to polish off most of it. [Laughter]
One has to understand that this power has to manifest through you. You must have your own powers. Why do you worry? He might be a great powerful person, all right, so what? Who are you? You do not even get the know-how of the whole thing. Imagine! You don’t know what he’s talking about, what are these mantras. Just go and ask anybody, any one of these Sanskrit scholars, if you want I can supply this. If these mantras are even Sanskrit!
I’ll give you an example of this. You know, there’s a very tremendous difference between a learned Indian in Sanskrit language, and a person who is not. We have here one scholar, Bharadwaj [unsure] in Sanskrit language. He’s not Realized soul or anything, but he knows about Me and he knows that. Naturally, if he knows about Me, and if he is a Sanskrit scholar he knows what I am. Because what I say is written there, and that’s what I do.
And these people wanted to call him for a wedding, they want to have him in their ashrams. So they told her that, “Mataji Nirmala Devi is going to have a lecture and it’s all right”. He said, “What an occasion for Me to see her in person”.
He did not even tell you the meaning of all these mantras. He did not tell you the know-how of it. He did not tell you how to move them, nothing of the kind, and you think he’s greater than you. Why do you? You do not know anything about yourself. You do not know anything about anybody else. What have you got out of him, all these years?
Seeker: You are here. Shri Mataji: Hum? Seekers: Yes. Shri Mataji: It was judged, you see, what I am saying- Seeker: He says he’s got you out of it. Seeker lady: I feel we have, is it not true that one has to just keep searching and keep searching? Shri Mataji: That’s guru shopping. Seeker lady: You just keep looking, you don’t just give up. Shri Mataji: You see, this is another problem with the Western people, it’s very wrong. You see, Charlie Chaplin, have you seen him? He used to fix those nuts on that, Modern Times, did you see that? And he was on and on with nuts like that. And when he was even released from the work he would be going on. [Laughter] He would forget that now the release has come, it’s something else. The guru shopping is still on. Till they finish the last pie of their purse, till they have exhausted them completely, till they receive all the curses of these gurus with multiple sclerosis and all that, they go on and on. Still Mother is waiting for you, whenever you will come, I’ll go off to the place. But why waste your time? For what? Have you got too much money? [Laughter]
Mentally you cannot understand Sahaja Yoga, you cannot. Don’t try to rationalize. Don’t try to rationalize. With that horrible fellow, you did not rationalize, why didn’t you ask what is he doing? You couldn’t ask that question to him. Now see the difference! Why? I respect you for this, that you are free, you can ask the questions. You have to be free to be completely liberated.
You accepted him, I don’t know how. He didn’t even tell you why he was doing like this. You the intelligent, the intellectuals, never questioned. Why didn’t you say that how do you say you are the one who’s giving us the right? Did you ask him a question like this, my child? You should have, how much money did you pay him? Another seeker lady: The difference between that and this, is that with that I was learning a technique. Shri Mataji: What is it? Learning a technique. All right. Another seeker lady: A TM technique which I thought was to do with relaxation. I wasn’t looking for spiritual guidance. And I also wasn’t looking for any kind of deity or figure of worship and I never had that, right back, and never would. Shri Mataji: You see, it’s all right, you may not look out for anyone or anything. You wanted to have relaxation. You cannot have relaxation at all. You cannot by any other method. You have to accept yourself. You have to know yourself, otherwise you can never be relaxed. It’s a simple thing. As I said, if your petrol is going to finish all the time, you are going to be tensed up. Unless and until you are Realized, you cannot be relaxed. That’s the time when you are Realized, that’s the time your ego merges. Another seeker lady: But it’s [unclear] it’s absolute relaxation, Shri Mataji: Which is? Another seeker lady: What I was seeking. Shri Mataji: No, but you see, this is not a shop. In seeking, there is not a shop on, that you give Me five percent, you see. I want meat only half lakh. You can’t do like that, you get it in the mind. But you have to ask for it. If you say, I was not seeking. “Who are you? “ Say, a question comes to Me. Ask yourself, “Who am I? Why did I say so that I was not seeking? Who was I? Was I a person who had lent money to somebody, that I was asking for it?” See the attitude, you see, of an intellectual is like that. We must ask questions to ourselves. “Who are we?” We are asking. I am seeking this. Now on what premises you are seeking? I’ll tell you that. You go to a shop, all right, selling that. But when you are seeking, on what right are you seeking? What has given you right to seek? I’ll ask this. Only that you have some money, is it?
Seeker lady: I mean, I began seeking first when I was about two years old. I just knew I wanted it. Shri Mataji: You are different. You are different. But I am talking about her question. You are different, it’s correct. I am asking her. That if you say that, “I was not seeking this, I was seeking this. Was there a mark at all?”
Another seeker lady: That’s just a question of awareness and not your seeking is missing or not. Shri Mataji: Yes, it’s a question of – but still supposing something is missing. Now I would say that you do not have Buckingham Palace. Say for example, that’s missing. Can you ask for it? No, how can you? You have no right. Just see my point. Did you follow the point? It’s a very subtle point. You see the point? When you are seeking, I am seeking this much of that, on what grounds? Let’s see. On what grounds are you seeking? What right have you got to seek anymore? What is your basis? Let’s see that. You see we go to the bank, all right, “I want five hundred pounds “. If you do not have any account, then they’ll say, “Get out”. If you have an account, then you can go and ask. Now do you have any account for seeking? What accounts do you have? With that point, you reach a point where you say, “I don’t know”. That’s the only answer you can give. So, I would say that you are seeking not because you think you are seeking, but seeking is embedded in you. It is in you. You did not ask for human life. From amoeba, you have become a human being without asking.
And you have been made for that. As human being, you have got freedom to ask for it. And when you ask for it, because you are a human being, you are given the freedom and you have a right to ask for it. That’s the only right you have got, to ask. Why? Why you have to ask for it? Why you have a right to ask is this, because God is not going to fall at your feet and say that, “Take your Realization”. No, you have to ask for it. It’s not right, but it’s [unclear], you see? This is the point, did you follow? He’s not going to fall at your feet and say that, “My child, ask for Realization”. He’ll show you. He’ll put you into such a curse, such wonderful things that you’ll get out of it.
To get this gift is a privilege. Do you know that? It’s a privilege to be Self-realized. You do not adorn God, God adorns you. If you accept the reality, you become greater. The reality doesn’t become greater. This is all ego ideas, you see, “I seek reality”. As if you are obliging the reality, are you? The reality cannot be obliged. You are going to be obliged. This is only possible if the gurus, who take money from you, and you can say that, “Only give five rupees worth of things, because I don’t have any money”. [Shri Mataji is laughing] You follow? And when you come to this point of understanding that how his ego plays tricks with you even you think, and they have used it. Do you know that? They have used your ego. They have pampered it by saying that you can pay for it. You feel, “Oh, I can purchase the guru”, finished!
They have paid, all the Americans ego much more than that of English. [Shri Mataji is laughing] And that’s why they are still there. It’s rather difficult to bring them out. They said, “No Mother, we paid for it”. I said, “What? Go ahead, Yankees, go ahead”. That’s what you can say. One of the gurus has become a Yankee now, you know? He dresses up like that, and only he has had fifty-three Cadillac [unsure]. He wanted to buy one ship, which of course the English thought it was too much. So he was sent out to America. No, no, he had not Cadillac [unsure]. He had Roll Royce’s from English people, gift to the guru.
Now don’t play into the tricks of your ego. Try to understand it’s a privilege, if you can get Self-realization. They have always denied all the incarnations, all ego-oriented people. That’s the sign. When Christ came, they denied Him. When Krishna came, they denied Him. When Rama came, they denied Him. And they kept up their ego saying that, “Some incarnation is going to come later”. Then He is going to hang all of them together [unclear]. That’s what He is going to do. That’s the one He is going to come last, but not the least. Try to understand. It’s a gift to you, take it with gratitude. It’s the beauty of God which you have to know. Just talking about it or thinking about it or being mad about it, or doing any sort of a funny gesture about it, you cannot get it. There’s no technique, nothing. God has made all the technique within you. And matter out of his technique.
All your techniques are claiming? Seeker: No, no, no, no. It’s my balance. It’s only my balance. Absolutely. [Unclear]. Now it’s their turn. Shri Mataji: Yes. They are from? Seeker lady: Yes, they are from Wellingborough and Kary’s sister wants to come as well tomorrow, as she could not make it for tonight. Shri Mataji: All right, all right, I’m going to be here because she is going to be bothered about lunch. Seeker lady: I’m not, I’m not bothered if it’s ready. Shri Mataji: Get Maria. See Maria. What a sweet child she is. See, look at her. She is so beautiful. It took no time for her to be Realized and to reach a name [unsure]. She’s giving Realization to people. What a satisfying life she has. She’s so beautiful, so beautiful.
Such beautiful children. Expose your beauty. Know about it. Enjoy it. Why do you want to end up your life like this? Because, maybe, there’s some conditioning in your mind. Somebody has taught you. Like Hindus, you see, they get some ideas in their childhood, they’ll go on with it. Some, there was a lady, she used to pick her hair like that. I said, “Why you have to do this?” She said, “My grandmother told me that if you pick your hair like that, then you’ll go to svarga [paradise; unsure]”. I said, “Now when did your mother, grandmother [die]?” She said, “Long time back”. I said, “Now she’s dead, at least finish this”. But till the age of seventy, she was doing that, all her life. She couldn’t get over. [Laughter] The conditionings are so much, you see, and it’s all talk, talk, talk, talk, talk. Be careful, you see. You be careful. Seeker lady: It’s not real. Seeker: No, the worries come. Shri Mataji: It’s not real, but what is it? It’s light. Like the gurus, it is. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
There are many fake things, but best are these gurus, I don’t know how. [Laughter]
Ah. So, you can come tomorrow and bring them along. They are very sweet children, but one child is sick, the youngest. Seeker lady: She has to sit with the child. Shri Mataji: Tomorrow? Will she come? Seeker lady: Today. Another seeker lady: Today, yes. It’s her child, and she’s not coming tomorrow. Can you sit with the child? Shri Mataji: What’s the matter? Another seeker lady: I don’t know. Something wrong with the child. Shri Mataji: [Hindi] [Conversation in Hindi about the false guru]
Shri Mataji: You follow him? Seeker: No. Seeker lady: [Unclear] Shri Mataji: You see there’s a fellow who is supposed to be systemised as a guru and he is an astrologer. And the child is caught up. I asked her, “Do you go to anyone?” “Yes”. The child is caught up. Now you can see yourself how the child is caught up. Seeker: Where is it, in Plymouth [unsure]? Shri Mataji: In Birmingham. See, it won’t be, it will be afraid of- You are seeing me there. Now let’s see what [unclear].
[Conversation in Hindi about the false guru] You see, can you feel it? All that side is possession. [Hindi] They don’t even know. [Unclear conversation] Is it better now? To the God, you see, we say, “Jay, jay”. So she says, “Jay, jay”. Jay, jay. Acha? [Conversation in Hindi] Chandrika. My husband’s name. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
[Conversation in Hindi] [Shri Mataji is laughing]
You see, Nabhi. There is an expert. [Laughter] He could not sit from the very beginning. You see? Just see. Seeker: [Unclear]. Shri Mataji: He is sitting here. They are feeling it here and this is the Left Nabhi, you see.
Now there is a mantra for this. Can you imagine [unclear] the Left Nabhi is the realm of Fatima. She was the daughter of Muhammad Sahib. [Unclear]
She was the Lakshmi. But on the left-hand side, Lakshmi is Fatima. She is the Gruha Lakshmi. She is the one who is a Lakshmi in the house, the housewife. The Lakshmi is the lady of the house, Gruha Lakshmi. She is the lady of the house of God, Gruha Lakshmi. Ah, see! All right?
How can you think about it? You are getting a burning here. All of you are getting it. Now think about it. Seeker: It’s very strong. Shri Mataji: Did you get any burning? Not yet. Tickling, that’s it, tickling. Tickling is correct. I also get it. You see, first, what happens, the vibration is so much that you just feel the vibration all the time. Gradually, then the sensitivity settled down. Now you are feeling much [unclear].
Are you getting the cool breeze? Good. It’s very good. What about you? Are you getting it? This one, the lady sitting there. Nothing?
Are you getting the cool breeze? Seeler lady: Yes. Shri Mataji: Good! It’s beautiful. Your all eyes, if you see the eyes, they are so dilated, the pupils. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Her right side, in her liver, you see. Lucy, can you put your hand on her liver, please? Lucy: Yes, Mother. Shri Mataji: Yes. Felicity, what do you say? See now, Maria. You see, Indians would be more interested in getting cured than anything else. They just want cure, that’s all. They are not interested in Realization or getting Realization, in England. In India, they are all right. I don’t know what sort of people have come here.
[End of Maria’s House Part I & II Wellingborough UK NITL HD] [End of Maria’s House 03 HD]
[The work on new seekers still goes on on audio Northampton part 2 from 39:12] Right Nabhi? That’s it. Djamel? Djamel: Right Nabhi and Left Void. Shri Mataji: Right and Left Void? [Unclear conversation] What about her? Just see her vibrations. You see her vibrations. Yes, just sit.
Patricia, you see. Particia: This lady? Shri Mataji: No, no, this one here. This lady in the front. She has Nabhi, what else? Now you’re feeling, you are feeling the cool breeze. Seeker lady: Hum, yes. [Unclear conversation.] Shri Mataji: When you start thinking, you go. You just don’t think. Just enjoy. What is there to think? You see, we are not going to [unclear] or anything. Just take it easy. Just take it easy. Just allow, let it be dissolved. If it is simple, doesn’t matter. If you want, I’ll make it difficult. You want Me to make it difficult for you? It’s already becoming, the way you are losing it. All right? Don’t ask for difficulty. It’s easy, it’s good. That’s simple.
You see, because somebody who knows the job [unclear]. For example, if you want Me to, even to put this thing into that, I won’t be able to do. The repairing part, I cannot do at all. But somebody who knows the job, can repair and do everything properly. Somebody who knows, that’s all.
Ah! What’s it? Sahaja Yogi: Vishudhi, Right Vishudhi. Shri Mataji: Only right? Sahaja Yogi: Agnya and Left Nabhi. Shri Mataji: Partly Right Nabhi. Sahaja Yogi: Yes. Left Nabhi. Shri Mataji: Left Nabhis. Heart. That’s heart. Now what about her?
You see, the only thing is in India, the women are more powerful. Here the men are more powerful than women. I’m surprised. Really, it’s surprising. Women are very powerful in India, very powerful. And women don’t think much in India, you see. They have intuition more. They are tremendous [unclear] all right. We have our intuition. We live on intuition.
[Unclear conversation]
“It’s here, that’s my place”. You have to have faith in you. All right?
You ask questions, on vibrations you ask, “Are you the one who is going to give moksha?” Ask. Ask, openly ask. Seeker lady: Then I have to say it. Shri Mataji: So ask openly. Seeker lady: Are you the one who is going to give moksha? Shri Mataji: It is starting? Seeker lady: I don’t know. Shri Mataji: When the answer is yes, you’ll get the vibrations. When the answer is no, it will stop the vibrations. The rapport is established, your computer has started working, simple thing. You get answers. [Cut in the audio 43:10]
[A SEEKER SPEAKS ABOUT TM.] … Now to go to [Mattmore; unsure]. They’re enticing all the men to go to [Mattmore; unsure]. And their whole attentions have been diverted away from working or doing some, you know, something for themselves, to go and sit down- Shri Mataji: And work for this person first? Seeker: Yes. Shri Mataji: See you have been labouring for him for nothing at all. I can understand where, you see, in Egypt, people had slaves who worked for the kings with force. But this is very nice, you just entice them and use them just like slaves! Seeker: And they work for nothing, you know. In Switzerland, the whole – every single thing that is done in Switzerland- Shri Mataji: With Sahaja Yoga, I do that. Seeker: Is, is. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker lady: What happens in Switzerland? Seeker: Well, all the work is done for nothing. Shri Mataji: You see, same is with Me. I’m working that for [nothing] [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker: You know, it’s, and they work there for 2 or 3 years, you know, everything. There is 700 people working in Switzerland. Shri Mataji: Just imagine! Just see that! Seeker: And you know, that the TM organization was 5% of the entire Swiss tourist trade in Switzerland 5%. 5%. It’s an incredible amount of people. You must imagine for 5% of their tourist trade of their income, came from that TM organization. Yes, you know that. They had over 200 hotels constantly booked. You know, it’s for a frank a day. A frank, two franks a day per person, and they charge somewhere around about – I think it’s somewhere around about- it costs you about 40 Franks, 45 Franks a day. And the hotels cost them a frank a day. They don’t spend more than a dollar per week per person on food.
Shri Mataji: This is mass madness. Seeker: That’s what it is. Shri Mataji: Madness. Absolutely madness. Seeker: You know, and you see these people walking around and it’s, you know, it’s difficult to believe that you could see people like that, you know. I mean big business. Shri Mataji: And just look at this now. Let Sahaja Yogis see for themselves. You see, one has to understand how these mad things spread so fast. Destructive things always spread very fast. See, if you start fire, it will destroy so many houses. But if you want, say, put light, it won’t spread like that. Seeker: You know, nothing, there’s been no- whenever things get onto the more spiritual aspects, you know, talks diverted onto something about doing agriculture and all these things, how to involve people and getting more people into this aspect, into this. And then someone says that, “Maharshi, I had this and this happened”. And then he says, “Anyone else have that?” And then he about 50 other people put up their hands. And he says, “You see, everyone else is having it. So, there’s nothing unusual about it”. And then so the whole… You know someone has had a Kundalini experience and then he says, “Well, that’s just stressing and how many other people had?” And about 200 people put up their hand. And he says, “There are 500 people. You see, everyone else is having it. So, forget about it”. You know and that’s how it’s done. And people, the whole attentions- Shri Mataji: Other side, “So what? Forget about it!” Seeker: Yes. So, if you have any, you know, any experience of how should we say, you know, [unclear] of the Kundalini, it’s instantly down into the ground out of all- there is, no one even talks about it. I mean, it’s just so unpredictable, you know. I mean, it’s just not something that you mention. Shri Mataji: [Unclear]. Seeker: Yes. Oh, it’s way out there. It’s nothing to talk about. Shri Mataji: It’s nothing, nothing compared to what he’s going to do to you. Seeker: Yes. And then if you say something, you know, then they say, “Oh, I am stressing”, you know, and they run away from you. And like this, “Oh, no”. You know, “He’s just stressing”. You know, it’s really difficult to comprehend him when you’re not within that that payment window [unsure]. You know, they have large corporations in America, large big businessmen throughout this country, and in Europe all over. Do you know they, I mean, in Germany, Israel, they got over 1% of the population.
Shri Mataji: Israel, just imagine. No wonder the way they are nowadays, making attitude. Seeker: No way they got nearly. Shri Mataji: What about Muslims? Seeker: None. Shri Mataji: None, thank God. At least they are safe. How is it that Muslims have not gone to him? Sahaja Yogini: I think it’s a prediction of Muslim [unclear]. Shri Mataji: Conflict? Sahaja Yogini: [Unclear]. Shri Mataji: But he thinks he’s a Hindu. He said this is Hindu. Seeker: Yes.
Shri Mataji: Come here. I wanted to see your Kundalini. Come along. I’d like to talk about that. Imagine! Just what do you say to that? I mean if you don’t mind[unclear] she has got. Just imagine! That means, according to him, this is not universal, at least. If it is Hindu. Seeker: Mother, you see, this is what happened in that court case in in in in America, you know, on religion. He said, “It’s not a”, you know, the organization said it was not a religion and therefore not Hinduism, because they were saying, “It’s illegal in America to teach anything religious in any schools or universities”. There is no such thing as you can’t be specific and teach Christianity or teach Judaism or teach, otherwise there’s a lot of big problems. Shri Mataji: Yes. I understand that the secularism as they call it. Seeker: Right. And so what happened was that they- the whole thing was that in Pennsylvania, not Pennsylvania, in the New England states, New Jersey. They, the Baptists, fundamentalists took it to court. They said, “If the TM organization can teach in schools, so can we, the Baptists. Because they are a religion.” And so the whole thing started, you know, this whole conflict and it went to the Supreme Court. Shri Mataji: What was going to happen [unclear]. Seeker: It went to the Supreme Court and the Baptist lost. And it was then allowed to be taught and it wasn’t a religion. And then the Baptist again took it to the Appeal court and they lost in the Appeal court, because they subpoenaed Maharshi to go to America. And he couldn’t get into America at the time simply because tax reasons. And because they were going to subpoena him for tax evasions in America. So he couldn’t go in, because of that.
And also that they knew if he’d gone on the stand there would be, you know, on the witness box, there would be a lot of nonsense. And so they lost the court case. And TM is now a religion in the whole of the New England states, not in the rest of America. They can still teach it in schools. So, it was then definitely stated that TM is an educational, because they teach, they have their own university in Fairfield, Iowa and where they teach the science of creative intelligence and this theoretically is a course which you go to and you attend or study on tapes. Sahaja Yogi: You can get a degree? Seeker: Yes, you can get a degree in the US, in America. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker: An MA, BA. Shri Mataji: Now let me laugh on this. [Shri Mataji is laughing] MS. MADs and all that. Seeker: MCI they call it. And PhD in Vedic science. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker: But there’s a number of places like that, you know, there’s a number of universities in America, where you can get the same. Probably Muktananda starting one very shortly, and various others, you know, the Hare Krishna have got something open in the East coast, and in the West coast somewhere. You know, they’ve all got their own big institutions.
Shri Mataji: Now you can see that how important is that your people should suddenly do something about it. And how important it is that we have to do it in a very, very big way. And there is very big protection for you. Nothing- not only that, but you have lot of creativity now how to do it. But you should not take it easy, do it fast. You can see that this is now taken up by universities. Tomorrow, it will be taken up by governments. And you can just try- Seeker: They’re trying. They’re trying in Thailand. Shri Mataji: Yes. Seeker: At the moment, they try and get the people to- they’ve offered free courses in Thailand to all the meditators to impress the Thai government, you know the Thai government. And this is what happened in Ethiopia. But unfortunately, Shri Matai: There was a ‘coup’. Shri Mataji: Everywhere. Wherever they will be, that’s how they are going to be toppled down. You see, university will close down, wherever they will teach, you see. And students will fall sick. All these things will happen, automatically. It’s a result, you see. This is the fruit of their doings.
Seeker: Yes. In Switzerland they’re having a big problem there with the police because in Switzerland, you’re not allowed to live in the country for more than 3 months unless you are registered in. And the thing is that the majority of the courses run for 6 months, we had to all get, when you go in, you know, you get a police sign and stamp passport and things like that. But those people who work there, and that’s why they can’t pay anyone. And so these people work there for three or four years. And it is hard work, you know. I don’t mean they do everything. I mean a minor staff of seven between seven and a thousand people. They do the kitchen work, everything, all for nothing. Shri Mataji: Free service. Seeker: And they are, can you imagine, raking the money in. No one knows where the money goes to, absolutely no idea where.
[Unclear conversation between seekers] Shri Mataji: Even if you put sindhur or something, will do work out. You see, it is going to break. No doubt. But you can do this, without to break down. You see, we have very simple methods. This red powder that you have seen, you have to just spin it around. [Unclear conversation between seekers]
Shri Mataji: Now I want you to touch here. And put your hands like this. All right. Yes. Just that’s it. Now go further up. Yes. And you have to put your head down there. You see? Be careful. Yes. Let’s see, just a little.
You see the most beloved wife in the whole world was Sita. No husband could have loved a wife more than Rama had. And he had to sacrifice her for the sake of the public of India. You see, this is what was to be shown in his life. Of course, she was she was Mahalakshmi herself. So nothing was going to happen to her, you see, that he knew very well. But that he had to show this, you see, play this drama, to show that the person whom you love the most has to be also sacrificed for public good. But in India just the opposite is done. For their own sons, they are selling the country. The first Prime Minister did it. Now they’re saying Indira also. Indira Gandhi did just the opposite of Ghandi. Opposite of Ghandi. See this was just to bring that awareness of an ideal king: Maryada Purushottam, the one who lives the highest type of human life with all the boundaries in him. You see, and that was the life of Rama. And that’s why he had to do it, just to show to people that to that extent – not that he knew not who she was and how she was, and that she was absolutely pure, nothing but purity, but he had to give her up, in the end. It was, it’s a very beautiful subtle thing which you will understand gradually in Sahaja Yoga.
And then to do all this and give Shri Rama’s mantra! I was telling her about this unauthorised mantra given. Like, I told her like, you do not know the queen or you do not know the Prime Minister at all. You have no connection. And somebody tells you, “All right, you just are just shouting, ‘Margaret Thatcher! Margaret Thatcher!’ and she’ll come to you”. Will she come to you? Seeker: No And if you go near her house, and start shouting, you’ll be arrested. It will be mockery. In the same way, when you are taking Shri Ram’s name, you are to be authorized. And when you are authorized, when you enter into this kingdom, then only you are authorized. Then you take his name, then his blessings will come to you, but not before. Then what happens, you take the name of, “Rama, Rama, Rama”. Who comes around? Some servant somewhere, dead. He comes around the busy body, because he wants to empower you.
When Rama will meet you, you will get your own powers. He’ll bestow them upon you. When you go and meet the king, you see, what does he do? He gives you some powers. He gives you this district as a gift. The king gives you the gift, you see. In the same way, when you take the name of Rama he gives you his blessings and, which is on the right-hand side heart which you have to cleanse. People who suffer from asthma, their heart chakra is [unclear].
But if your fatherhood is wrong, say, if there are people, you see, who- I’ve seen someone who had [unclear] abortion. He asked his wife why- not wife but then someone you call a friend- to have an abortion, and the child was lost and he had that chakra [unclear].
So you have to be a good father. If your fatherhood is challenged otherwise also like, you do not respect your father, then also. Even supposing your father has died very early in life you see, and he has left a mark of unhappiness in your heart or insecurity, then also [unclear]. Because that means that he’s still hovering around you. And you have to tell your father that, “I’m all right now. You take your birth. You take your Realization”. The chakra opens out. Like that, we have cured the asthma of people who have been suffering from 8 to 5 years.
The Maharaja of Kashmir, you see, he had this until he got his Realization. But you’ll be amazed, Sahaja Yoga is just the opposite of your TM, because those who get Realization are very slow to move. They will never announce it never. I don’t know what’s happened to them. They will never organize it. They’re very, very slow. They won’t even tell their own father or mother about it. They are extremely shy, over humble. And they have explanation for all this kind of a slow movement. They just don’t bother. Sahaja Yoga moves very slowly with Sahaja Yogis, so far. I will see now when the TM will divert their attention, if they move with that speed. But you will find even TM [unclear]. We had one girl, what’s was her name, from Germany. Sahaja Yogi: England. Shri Mataji: England. She lost all her property. She lost her husband, divorce him. She was in a mess very much. And when she came to Me, she said, “Mother, now I have nothing left, you see. I cannot offer anything”. I said, “Why? You need not to offer anything”. Seeker: [Unclear]. Shri Mataji: I beg your pardon? What does that mean? She’s divorced now. From Germany, from West Germany. She said, “I have travelled”. She too had some sort of a funny experience with this man. She travelled with him and all that. She said, “Many I- after coming to Sahaja Yoga” she said, “I believed that what you said is absolutely true. But I could not believe how this man could be that bad”. You see, still she was taking on. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker: Yes. Yes. Yes. This is this, this is the thing that- Shri Mataji: You cannot understand. Seeker: Oh, I can understand and I can see what’s going to happen that a lot of them are going to turn around to say, you know- Seeker lady: You really think we’re crazy. Seeker: You know, it’s going to be difficult for people to realize unless there’s something that, you know.
There’s this man who is, was the national leader in the country in person. He’s in his 70s and he just cannot. Seeker lady: He’s been [unclear] since 58. Shri Mataji: What was his name? What’s his name? Seeker: Vincent [unclear]. Seeker lady: A very good man. Seeker: He was a surgeon. He a very, very nice man, very devoted, very sweet man. He suffered and he – Shri Mataji: [Unclear]. Seeker: And he- it will kill him, literally kill him. Seeker lady: Well, what’s happened is at the last meeting. Shri Mataji: What happened last meeting? Seeker: At the last meeting, you know, they worked on him, he wanted to know how certain things had got out. Because they sent a letter to all the initiators throughout the country, asking them what they felt about- Seeker lady: A questionnaire, yes. Seeker: Yes, a questionnaire. And they got all the answers back and it got to the trustees’ meeting. How did this questionnaire, which was put out by the trustees, get out to the initiators board? A single initiator began to send this questionnaire. Because they’re all questioning things and he wanted to know this. And then the chairman of the board, Dr. James Seeker lady: Not a good man. Seeker: James said it was me who gave the names because I do not believe in what is going on, you see. So Vincent said, “But how can you do this?” You know, so on and so forth. And then he said, then it came out, you know, he was very against any of this thing. And then it came out, they said, “Where’s all the finance is coming from for running Matterhorn [unsure]? To run a place which costs over £248,000 and they had to spend £100,000 [unclear]. And they’ve got about 60 people sleeping there every day of the week meditating and not paying for it. And they want to know where the money is coming from. And so they said, “Oh, well, Steven Benson, who has a woman called Joey McCanti, who’s another. Yes. I mean” [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker lady: Steven is Joey’s son.”
Seeker: Steven is Joey’s son. And what he says- Shri Mataji: Joey’s son has another name. Seeker: What happens is that she he writes down, “Mommy, I need £1,000.” Mommy signed a check for £1,000 and just pass through. Shri Mataji: Really? Seeker: Yes. And this is how it’s done. “Mommy, I need a [unclear]”. 20,000. He has a [unclear]. Shri Mataji: And she’s the cashier. Seeker: Yes. She’s the number one. Shri Mataji: What’s her name? Let’s write it down. Joey McCanti and she is by 100%- [Unclear conversation]
Seeker lady: She’s just deluded. Seeker: She’s deluded? More than that. [Unclear conversation] Joe was married to a man who died. I don’t know when he died but she obviously loved him very much and Steven- Shri Mataji: No, no, no. I’m saying come forward just now. Tell me now. Seeker lady: Now, Joey was married to, what’s his name? I don’t know. Oh, he must have been called Benson. And well, he must have been called Benson because Steven is Steven Benson. He’s dead now. He died. Now, I think what happened is Joy loved him very much, and he died and she had this son. You see what I mean? So, her whole life is her son. She loves her son. She married again a doctor. So she’s now joining him and I don’t think she loves him very much. You know, I think he’s just, you know, he’s around. But I think she married him just to give- Seeker: He had a hard, hard time. Seeker lady: He had a hard time but I think that Joy really is interested in her son now. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Seeker lady: You see what I mean? So she would do anything to get Steven into the prime position. Therefore she’s fanatic. I mean she’s fanatic. Fanatic. Fanatic! Shri Mataji: Steven is the son. Steven is the son. and she has now got Steven into a situation where he’s in charge of Melborn, i.e. he has the signee, he has any money he likes and so on and so forth. So she’s happy and I think that’s why she’s fanatic. I mean I must just give her a little bit of a reason. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
Shri Mataji: You see, if you have a son, there’s no reason for you to be selfless. Is it? You see, you see, if you have a son that doesn’t mean- that’s what I said Rama’s character is. You have got the character like that. You have no business to be committing sins because you have a son, you see? Seeker: I mean she’s the number one. She’s in charge of giving the cities [unclear]. Seeker lady: She’s in charge of giving the cities [unsure], she hasn’t been thinking of what she is doing. Seeker: But she knows as much about the cities or anything else about it is that grain of sand that I just bought. I mean, she’s- Shri Mataji: All right. Let me write down her name. What’s it? You write it down. You’ll just [unclear]. Seeker lady: I’ve actually got photos of lots of the teachers. Shri Mataji: That’s good! Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Bring it down. [Unclear conversation] Just write it down. We’ll work it out all right.
Seeker: Oh, and she’s a big problem over [unclear] too. Seeker lady: She’s the one who wanted to try and [unclear].
Shri Mataji: Douglas, let him sit down.
[Shri Mataji is laughing]
Fighting over that muffler [unsure] of mine, is it? Just see this. Let’s see this now. How clever. How clever.
It’s a money-making proposition. Just imagine, they have looted money to this extend. It’s worse than mafia.
You see, there’s something I always say, you are too good. He has no brain of goodness. He does no good to anyone.
Seeker lady: In fact, my children [unclear part]. She’s 10 years old [unclear part]. Shri Mataji: They are still around with you? They are with you now? Seeker lady: No [unclear part]. Shri Mataji: That’s, how many children? Seeker lady: Three. Shri Mataji: Now with him? Seeker lady: Yes, I [unclear part]. I’m in hospital. Shri Mataji: Why did you accept this? Seeker lady: I just cry all the time. [Unclear part]
Seeker: Angie is not the only one. There was- you met another girl called Carla Campbell. Shri Mataji: Yes, yes. She was really bad. Seeker: Oh! And she’s not the worst, you know. I mean they are worse, you know. Shri Mataji: She was very bad. [Unclear] has something in her stomach, but not that bad. Seeker: But it’s, in America, there have been some real bad [unclear]. I mean really. Shri Mataji: How are you now Angela? How are you feeling now? Very hot still.
Another seeker lady: How many other names do you want? He’s got a wife, very nice wife who is a [unclear] sister.
Shri Mataji: Now, you feel more hot, on right or left? Right. There On the back. Put her Kundalini around. Mooladhara? Sahaja Yogi: Yes, yes. Shri Mataji: Mooladhara she has? Sahaja Yogini: Swadisthan. Sahaja Yogi: Kumkum? Shri Mataji: There’s no Kumkum. Sahaja Yogi: Light? Shri Mataji: Light no, lemon. Sahaja Yogi: I’ve got some new ones. Shri Mataji: New ones would be better. Sahaja Yogi: I’ve got some new chilis. [Shri Mataji is laughing]
[Unclear conversation] Djamel: We would like to have a candle. Sahaja Yogi: Do you need a hanky to hold it? Djamel: What is a hanky? Sahaja Yogi: Handkerchief. Djamel: No, like that it will be all right.
Sahaja Yogi: It’s a great moment. Sahaja Yogini: Happy birthday to you! Shri Mataji: Just like that. It is your birthday. It’s better now? Are you all right? Sahaja Yogi: Still a bit on the Left Mooladhara. Shri Mataji: Left Mooladhara.
[Unclear conversation]
Seeker: So, you know what you’re saying is, I’ve seen so many married couples in Switzerland who have been completely- they’re not even allowed to stay in the same building together. You know, one has to stay down there and one goes down there and they meet each other and say they, you know, that’s as far as it goes now. The complete separation of any family or any dharmic things like that. You know, they completely fall off their dharma now. Shri Mataji: You see what, they started from the family. If you want to destroy people, you see, how you do it? Start destroying them from the root, the family. Now as it is, in this society, it is settled, you see, a kind of a society making things to the family life. On top of that, he has crowned the whole thing, you see, to separate the husband and wife nicely. He creates problems for them. Seeker lady: [Unclear] because I mean look at the way he behaved. You see what I mean. Shri Mataji: Again he’s worried about him. Let him go to hell! No, no, no. Seeker lady: You know, I was saying it’s so hypocritical what he is doing there. [Unclear] Shri Mataji: You see, he is not only hypocritical. You see, you do not know really many words as I do not know how to say things about him, and I’m absolutely useless to describe it. But at least, I know what it is. You do not know what he is. Hypocritical is what? It’s nothing! He is everything that’s evil. He’s doing it with deliberations and understanding and a complete scheming going on. Seeker: Oh yes, I’m convinced with that, ever since. Shri Mataji: So, hypocrisy for him is a quality that he’s so hypocritical. It’s not a disqualification for him. That’s how he has managed you. I mean to give up hypocrisy, he would not like to expose himself. That is camouflage. You understand my point? Seeker lady: Very much. Shri Mataji: That’s what I was saying.
Now. Is she better Sahaja Yogini: It’s cool. Shri Mataji: Better now Angela? So you have to be with limes for some days. It’s all right? [Shri Mataji is laughing] So simple! These limes can manage an unimaginable. You should put a lime tree in every- Seeker: They were created for that? Shri Mataji: This is Ganesha, you know? Ganesh’s tattva that it absorbs all that. Ah! These are bombs for these people. Real bombs. Seeker: Yes. You know they have, whenever you do puja. It’s no lime, nothing like that. No lemons. It’s completely out. Shri Mataji: But what puja you do? Whose puja you do? Seeker: What we usually do is, I don’t know whose puja it is. It’s in part of the Gita. Shri Mataji: Bhagavad Gita. Seeker: Yes. It’s the Shankaracharya one. I think it goes [unclear words] Shri Mataji: Hum? Seeker: Govinda [unclear words]. Shri Mataji: Govinda is Krishna’s name. Seeker: Yes, it’s a mentioning of all the all the masters. Shri Mataji: If you can write it down, then I will know what all the masters are. I hope they are not brought down from Krishna up to Maesha and all the masters.
Seeker lady: [Unclear words] Shri Mataji: Apavitra. Apavitra? Seeker lady: [Unclear words. Lady goes on saying the slokas]
Shri Mataji: Very simple it is.
[Unclear words. Lady goes on saying the slokas and mantras]
Shri Mataji: Vibrations getting hot. You see, this is all the description of- It is like, first of all it’s about Krishna, you see, then he praises Shankaracharya. And then he praises his guru the whole [unclear] who has nothing to do with Shankaracharya in no way. It’s misappropriation. And then the thirdly, these are all things done unauthorized, and all the devils are all like this. This is absolute Tantric. All the mantras are Tantric. Seeker: And all the mantras are Tantric. Shri Mataji: No, no, no, no, no. Not at all. These, these what you said just now, you see. This one is absolutely is the first half is the praise of Lord Vishnu. Second is the praise of Shankaracharya. In between, what they have put, you see, and the spice is the guru of his only. And then in the end of it, you see, is also again a Vishnu’s, this [] this one is about Vishnu’s description. So these descriptions of all these things are shlokas, are called as shlokas. These are just to praise. These are the praise of the Vishnu and is the praise of the guru.
Now Shankaracharya, you see, started his- in the sixth century he came on this earth, and he wanted to, sort of, divert people from the deeds [unsure] of going to another extreme. So he diverted to bring them above. And he talked of Kundalini and he talked of raising the Kundalini. But he has lots of books about it. Now there is no mention of his putting these gurus there as who are not Realized. He said, “Only the Realized soul should be made as their, as the ‘shankaracharya’. Otherwise, they had no value”. You see, starting the pitch is all right [unsure], but he said only the Realized soul should become the people in charge of this, you see, and they are the only people who should give.
He has made the whole thing so clear-cut, that despite all that, you see, because he did not give Realization to people who were around him and could not, I would say, that’s why the whole thing is just like Christianity. You see, where is Christ in this Christianity?
So what happened Christ – these people never believed him till he was resurrected, you see. Now when he was resurrected, then what’s the use? People could not do anything to their Kundalini. He could not raise their Kundalini. And then they had, they went absolutely astray because without Kundalini raising, without Realization, whatever you try, you spoil it. It’s like your telephone is not yet connected, and you try to use it. What happens? You spoil it.
So the whole thing is in the spoiling of the Kundalini. It is so simple and it happens with every deed that if it is unauthorised. Then, if you sing that praise, they don’t like it. You are unauthorised. It looks like a mockery. They don’t like it.
These Tantrikas found out that if you praise these Deities, they don’t like it. Then you go on doing more and more. Then you go on doing it more and more. When you try to do it more and more, the Deity just disappear from that area. That area becomes vulnerable. So, they know that the Deity existing on that. Then, at that point, they invite people who are afraid of God, I should say dead spirits, and these horrible spirits will then enter into that. There they find a place of connection and when they are connected, then they start using these spirits. And that’s how they form [unclear] this is horrid. Seeker: Horrid, horrid. Shri Mataji: But some of them, they all have different methods of doing it. For example, Rajnesh. Rajnesh, what he does that- what he has done that time, they put a Deity, and before the Deity, they do [unclear part]. All kinds of dirty things. So, the Deity disappears because the Deity doesn’t like it, you see, nobody likes that [unclear part]. Then Gods, how can they like it? So mostly they use the mother’s sin, you see. [Unclear part], that’s always 64 [unclear], you see, she’s the most powerful Deity. They use her. And now that they start doing it, first the Ganesha gets angry then they get blisters, they get all kinds of things, and they get heated up, everything happens, so they are adamant [unclear] you see. It goes on and on, till they have completely become one with the void which was left there with the disappearance of the Deity, till they go on working on it. Once they go on working on it, then the place becomes negatively powerful. So it starts sucking in such people [dead souls] who are interested in negative things. So they get all of them and that’s the media.
Another place is, this is on the Mooladhara, first chakra that they attack. Then they have gone to such a level, these Tantrikas. They have tried to show that, Uma, Gauri, the mother of Ganesha, they have released a statue of that, they have been doing a statue, Gauri is sitting and is having a sex life with Ganesha. Can you imagine? Exactly [unclear] you see. And at such a thing, the attention of God recedes from this. It is all right, there is no need to have attention on them because they have chosen in their freedom to be evil.
Another place is, this is on the Mooladhara, first chakra that they attack. Then at, you have seen, at every point, every chakra is attacked by these modern groups. Like the other one is this one, what’s his name – we had that call from that lady. Sahaja Yogini: Maharishi [unsure] Shri Mataji: No, no, no. His name, he is not-he is Chinese or Japanese, you see. Sahaja Yogi: Yes. Moon. Shri Mataji: Moon, Moon, Moon, Moon. Sahaja Yogi: He is Korean. Shri Mataji: He is Korean. Moon is, you see. Now this fellow has tried the heart chakra. This chakra center heart, where the Deity is the Mother, here. So what they do, they try the trick, another kind of hypocrisy, that they pick up children and young people who have had no family life, and collect them and tell them that, “We have got a place for you to give love”. So all of them join together and they sell their love to people. And they have to give 15th part of their wealth and 16th they can have. The rest is to the Moonies, you see, for their love. So this is how it works. Understand about it? Now this horrible fellow had worked on the Swadisthana, just like that. That’s why it’s more dangerous because Swadisthana works on the supraconscious area. And he found out the right answer for the Western people, because Swadisthana chakra, by which you think, you see, Swadisthana converts the fat from your stomach in such a way, it transforms in such a way, that it can be used by your brain. So the cells go upward, and there’s all the time replacement of the new cells of the brain. Now this Swadisthana also has to look after other organs like your uterus, your kidneys, your liver, your pancreas, your spleen. All these, it has to look after.
So what happens that, he has worked on his Swadisthana. So he- what he does that he finds out a place where he can somehow or other worship Brahma. Now there is no temple of Brahma in India, except in Pushkar there is a temple, where he may not be able to enter because there’s only one temple like that. So the best way to upset him is to do unauthorized yajnas, fire element, right hand-side work. This is fire ceremony you can do. Fire ceremony is the right-hand side. It just creativity by which you create auspiciousness by your exciting, invocating the Deities on the right-hand side. Then you can say, excite by that Brahma and his five other Deities like the Deity of the earth, and the deity of the –