1 August 1982
Adi Shakti puja: Mother, make me such that I suck more of the Divine
Cowley Manor, Cheltenham (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English)

Shri Mataji: Have the Americans come, those who have done the puja, have they come?
Sahaja Yogi: Yes, Mother.
Shri Mataji: Are they here?
Shri Mataji: Oh, they are here. Then it’s all right. And in these new centres, have you started with puja anywhere?
Sahaja Yogini: Yes, Mother.
Shri Mataji: No, yours is all right. I’m asking about England.
Warren: Any centres in Britain? Where there are new people.
Shri Mataji: Cheltenham, for example. Where is Allan? Ask him.
Warren: He’s just gone out for a moment. Any centres in Britain, any new people here, right now?
Shri Mataji: If you have introduced them to puja, I don’t mind. But if they have never been introduced to puja, then you have to be careful. From their good point of view. I’m sorry I had to say this, because yesterday the load was too much, you know I couldn’t speak even, and lifting the Kundalini was like raising hundred donkeys on your head, it was too much. And all these half-baked people are such that they are like dog-in-the-manger, they won’t have it and they won’t allow others to have it. They’ll argue before the program, before the meeting starts, before the puja starts, specially. Because they don’t want you to enjoy the fruits of the puja; they’ll spoil your attention, they’ll argue, discuss.
[Aside: “Please sit down”]
What is there to argue in Sahaja Yoga? You have to take, that’s the point is, you have to take, there’s nothing to argue. How much you take is the point. And the worst part is that they don’t want to grow and they want to pull you down.
So, unless and until they are introduced to the idea of puja beforehand – then they start understanding the worth of puja, otherwise they do not, how will they understand? You see, it’s beyond them. So, you should not make them attend any puja, minimum, and also seminars I would say. Because seminars are meant for people who are intensively in Sahaj Yoga, to intensify their awareness. Not for people who are half-baked, who are Doubting Thomases, all this kind of people are absolutely useless, you should never bring them to a seminar. Whether it’s your son, father, brother, mother, sister, husband, wife, nothing doing. You shouldn’t bring anybody who is not fully awakened Sahaja Yogi, because seminars are meant for very intensive work.
And what I find, always these people will argue with Me, they are the first to question, they have something to say, they are the ones. Sahaja Yogis are keeping quiet and receiving it. I don’t mind even that, but what happens in the seminar, you have to receive more. And they do not receive, their attention is outside, they are disturbing everyone.
So, seminars are even, in a way, more important than an ashram, because in ashram there’s no other problem but to fight them out. But here, in a new place we go, we have to fight out all surroundings, the place itself has to be cleansed, everything has to be done. On top of that you have these horrible people around you, whom you have to convince. If they are not convinced, why are they here? Why did they spend so much money to come down? Be sure, they have come here to disturb us. I’m sorry we had to do that way. I wish people could be simple, straightforward, uncomplicated, and sensitive, but they are not. They are not sensitive people. They don’t understand what are they up to. By that they destroy themselves, no doubt, but they destroy part of you also, and also trouble Me. Yesterday it was too heavy, you know that. Such a deep subject and it was too heavy for Me. If they say they feel bad, all right, tell them: “We are sorry, we can’t help you.”
See, there are certain points where we have to have our freedom to allow those who can come in. That’s the point where we close the door. And there’s nothing wrong in it, because you have to equip more to pull them out. It has been always our practice, since long, there’s nothing new about it, everyone knows, not only in England, or any other place, even in India: we never allowed anybody to come for the Puja who was not a realized soul, and who was not a Sahaja Yogi, from the very beginning. Wherever we tried that, we found it was very difficult. So I hope there’s nobody sitting here with a doubting mind. If somebody’s there he should with all sincerity leave the hall and leave us alone, for the ascent. Anybody who has doubts should be kind and generous about it. It’s a very serious work we are doing. It’s not of making money or of throwing an enterprise or building a house or something like that.
It’s not even just making creations of worlds, it’s much more than that, it’s a very serious work we are doing and we don’t want anybody to cut our attention. Even some of the Sahaja Yogis I know, are half-baked. They must be corrected, all right, doesn’t matter, but they have been exposed to pujas, so it will do them good, not bad. But some people are just anti-God, and they have allergies for God. Any work you’d start doing in the name of God, they are so allergic, they react.
These are anti-God allergies, and they express themselves (Shri Mataji laughs) by different, funny methods. Now, all the Sahaja Yogis must know this, then you will not go too far with them. You will – you should discover this in anyone this allergy existing. You should say: “Sorry, we have nothing to do with you”. So that is for the people who have to have the privilege of this worship. Today is specially a great privilege because it was not so planned, but it worked out, just worked out.
Yesterday we did lots of cleansing. Now, today tell your mind to rest for a while. Tell your thoughts to stop for a while, and receive, receive more of it. Everybody has benefited by this reception but you have to receive more. There’s a capacity within you to receive. Puja, as I have told you many-a-times, is not for My benefit, by any chance, take it from Me. I’m much better off without it. Because when the enthusiastic deities start emitting vibrations with your asking – because you are saints, you see, just they are over-enthusiastic. And they are sitting there, busy-bodies, you know (laughter), they are sitting quietly waiting for a chance, you see, to emit vibrations, to save you, you see they want to just rush.
They emit so much that I tell them – “Just wait, just wait”. They want to save you, they want to give you, they’re so anxious, in their anxiety you see – I like it, to see the way they are anxious. But you don’t suck it, and I have a problem there. Once they have given they don’t want to take it back. If you don’t suck it, so it has to go to the atmosphere, it has to disappear somewhere. Is directed towards you and you don’t take it; so where does it go? It hangs into My tissues, it pains Me. So, sucking should be more. Sucking should be more. And just before the Puja you should say: “Mother, make me such that I suck more of the Divine”. Just pray that, with sincerity from your heart, just say that.
There’s another beautiful gesture I have seen, in Uzbekistan, it’s very good. They put both the hands on their heart like this (Shri Mataji puts both Her hands on her centre heart), and just press it, bending their head, asking. See, it creates a vacuum. That’s how they bow. [Long silence]
It’s beautiful! That’s very nice today.
So, let the children come here.
Shri Mataji: Aja, didi agai, didi agai [Hindi: “Come, sister has come, Sister has come”].
Now, sit there, all of you sit down, all right? Sit down now, sit down, sit down.
Now, come along, Matthews is also coming, sit down there, sit down, come along, let’s see, sit down. Now all the children are very sweet, and are going to sit down. Come along, sit down, sit down, nicely.
Where is didi? Didi kaha hai?
Younger granddaughter: Upar.
Shri Mataji: Upar! Abhi aya nahi?
[Hindi: “Where is sister? Where is sister?”
Younger granddaughter: Upstairs.
Shri Mataji: Upstairs! Not yet come?]
[Continuing in English to the children:]
All right, now, you should give Me the flowers now (children start giving flowers to Shri Mataji), so would be better for you to have vibrations, thank you. Thank you very much, thank you very much. Poor Rishi has none.
Now, you give Me these, to Me, give Me now. Give Me. Give Me, to Mother. All right, give that also.
Child [indistinctly]: But you have the one.
Shri Mataji: Also give. So thank you, thank you, thank you very much.
[She hands the flowers to a lady aside: “All right, just take this”]
All right, so now what should we do, Pujari is this. Just put a tikka to him (laughter).
Put to everyone,  not to the pujari.
Rustom Bujorjee: Got it.
Shri Mataji: All right. All right. That’s kajal? No, don’t put kajal. (Laughter) He’ll be like Bhairava! (Laughter) Good. May God bless you.
All right. Now, the children should sit like this, all right? On the side, for Ganesha Puja, like this, straight. So everybody can take photograph also, sit like this, all right? Ah. They have to take photographs. Yes, good, good. Oh, now sit here. Sit, sit down, all right.
Good, it’s very good. But you have to take out shoes! See, cannot have shoes here, take out shoes. Take out shoes, everybody’s taken out shoes, take out, take out – take out shoes. Yeah. So come along. Sit like this, on the sides.
[Hindi SOUNDS LIKE: Shuddhi mein Ganesha Puja?]
Rustom: Ha, Shri Ganesha Puja.
Rustom: To begin with, we will do first the invocation of the puja, then the puja to Lord Ganesha. And this would be followed by the puja to the Adishakti, Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
In the Devi Bhagavat Purana it is written that the puja to the Adishakti is the greatest puja that can be done by any being.
Shri Mataji: That’s why you are privileged.
Rustom: Even the Gods don’t do it.
Shri Mataji: None of them. They just touch My feet. None of them did Puja to Me. Believe Me.
[Softly, to a little girl – ed] Very good. All right, sit down.
Pujari starts and yogis join in: Om Twameva Sakshat, Shri Ganesha Sakshat, Shri Adishakti Sakshat, Shri Bhagavati Sakshat, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
[Most yogis start to repeat the Shri Ganesha mantra while a few begin the Mahamantra – ed]
Shri Mataji: One person should say then you can repeat, that’s better. What about Aradhna, where is she? She has not come? (Aradhana is Shri Mataji’s eldest granddaughter.)
Child: She is upstairs.
Rustom: We’ll start again. First Lord Ganesha, then Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali. Then Lord Kalki and then Lord Kalki and Sahasrara Swamini.
Yogi: Three times Shri Ganesha?
Yogi: How many times the Ganesha mantra?
Rustom: Each once, I mean.
Yogis: Om Twameva Sakshat, Shri Ganesha Sakshat, Shri Adishakti Sakshat, Shri Bhagavati Sakshat, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, Trigunatmika, Kundalini Sakshat, Shri Adishakti Sakshat, Shri Bhagavati Sakshat, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Adishakti Sakshat, Shri Bhagavati Sakshat, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat, Shri Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Rustom: Now the names of Lord Vishnu.
Om Shri Keshavaya Namaha, Om Shri Narayanaya Namaha, Om Shri Madhavaya Namaha, Om Shri Govindaya Namaha, Om Shri Vishnuve Namaha, Om Shri Madhusudanaya Namaha, Om Shri Trivikramaya Namaha, Om Shri Vamanaya Namaha, Om Shri Shridharaya Namaha, Om Shri Hrishikeshaya Namaha, Om Shri Sankarshanaya Namaha, Om Shri Vasudevaya Namaha, Om Shri Pradyumnaya Namaha, Om Shri Aniruddhaya Namaha, Om Shri Purushottamaya Namaha, Om Shri Aghokshajaya Namaha, Om Shri Narasimhaya Namaha, Om Shri Achyutaya Namaha, Om Shri Janardanaya Namaha, Om Shri Padmanabhaya Namaha, Om Shri Damodaraya Namaha, Om Shri Upendraya Namaha, Om Shri Haraye Namaha, Om Shri Krishnaye Namaha.
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Shri Mataji: Why these twenty-one names are taken before every puja, even before the deity’s invocation, first you have to worship Shri Ganesha; but even before worshipping – why these names are taken – is important to understand. Everything has a why. [Is] because these are the twenty-one channels within your Sushumna, twenty-one channels, we should say, in the complete Ida, Pingala and Sushumna nadis.
So to raise you, absolutely to give you the ascent, twenty-one channels in Ida, Pingala, Sushumna.
So one would say seven channels in the Sushumna nadi. But these seven channels are divided, multiplied by seven into three.
So every channel has got twenty-one other channels. So Sushumna nadi has got also twenty-one channels.
Left-hand side Nadis are as you know that – perhaps you know, I don’t know if you know the names or not.
And the right hand side also, like Gayatri, Parvati and all these are on the right hand side.
And the left ones are called as Chamundi, and all these left-sided things, there are seven of them.
Now, the central path has got twenty-one channels and has got twenty-one powers. And their deities are named according to the twenty-one aspects of Shri Vishnu.
And that’s why these twenty-one aspects are first said, so that within you all these twenty-one channels are awakened.
Within you, first of all.
Puja is a double thing, that a cup has to be made and then this source has to be opened out. So you are the cup. The Sushumna is the channel you have by which you suck in. So to open the Sushumna these twenty-one names are said.
Now, why first Shri Ganesha? Because Shri Ganesha is the beginning of the desire. And the end of the desire. You start with Ganesha and end up with Ganesha.
And that’s why Shri Ganesha is worshipped.
Is the other way round now, the source.
When you direct your attention to the source you worship it, and when you want to incite or open out your own being, then you chant it.
This is the difference between worship and a mantra. If you just say mantra, you open yourself up.
But when you worship and chant, then you tap the source. I don’t know if I’ve said this before or not.
Shri Mataji: No? All right. That’s how you understand the puja part.
Now, those who are newcomers, their cup is completely useless.
And when you excite the deities, they get busy opening their cups, everybody’s cups also. So it’s a double work. But if your cup is ready, it’s very easy to fill in. So now these twenty-one names I think you should take again with the understanding, is better. All right.
Rustom: Om Shri Keshavaya Namah, Om Shri Narayanaya Namah, Om Shri Madhavaya Namah, Om Shri Govindaya Namah, Om Shri Vishnuve Namah, Om Shri Madhusudanaya Namah, Om Shri Trivikramaya Namah, Om Shri Vamanaya Namah, Om Shri Shridharaya Namah, Om Shri Hrishikeshaya Namah, Om Shri Sankarshanaya Namah, Om Shri Vasudevaya Namah, Om Shri Pradyumnaya Namah, Om Shri Aniruddhaya Namah, Om Shri Purushottamaya Namah, Om Shri Aghokshajaya Namah, Om Shri Narasimhaya Namah, Om Shri Achyutaya Namah, Om Shri Janardanaya Namah, Om Shri Padmanabhaya Namah, Om Shri Damodaraya Namah, Om Shri Upendraya Namah, Om Shri Haraye Namah, Om Shri Shri Krishnaye Namah.
Pujari and Yogis: Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Rustom: Now we have the mantra for pranayama.
Shri Mataji: This is the Gayatri, the right side. Is the right side, and these are all the seven centres on physical level.
Shri Mataji: Pranayama is the same thing. Is for – Prana is right side. It’s physical side. You are opening the right side. You see, this Gayatri mantra you say. Bhur Bhuva Swaha and all these things. Now, Bhu is Pruthvi, Bhuva is Antariksha, you see, like that, it’s all the centres [Rustom: “Swaha”], the essence of the centres, you see?
Now, Antariksha – you’ll be surprised that you are the essence of all the Antariksha, your centres are. Yes.
Pujari [recites Pranayama prayer]: “Pranavasya Parabrahma rishi Paramatma Devata, Devi Gayatri chandah. Pranayame viniyogah.”
Shri Mataji: You do it only with the one nose?
Yogi: Both noses. (Not clearly audible)
Shri Mataji: Both the noses. Prana: Prana is right side. Prana shakti is right side, Mana shakti is left side.
So Prana shakti you are exciting because this prana is the one which spreads in the body, gives you the balance, which takes in and gives out.
Rustom: Now we have the Gayatri mantra.
Om bhū, Om bhuvah, Om swah, Om mah, Om janah, Om tapah, Om satyam, Om tat-Savitru-varenyam, bhargo devasya dhī-mahi Dhiyo-yo’nah prachodayāt
Om āpo jyotiras’omṛutam
Brahma bhūr-bhuvah swarom
Pujari and Yogis: Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Rustom: Om Sriman Maha-Ganadhipataye namah, Ishta devata-bhyo namah, kula-devata-bhyo namah, grama-devata-bhyo namah.
Shri Mataji: These are all pertaining to you. Kula Devata is your dynasty, from where you come. There is a god who looks after that. Then Grama Devata, of this village. There is a god who looks after this.
Is all for you, pertaining to you. Then – Kula Devata…?
Rustom: Ishta Devata.
Shri Mataji: Ishta, the One – your Ishta Devata is Me. Ishta means to whom we worship.
Rustom: Then: Sthana-devata-bhyo namah.
Shri Mataji: The god, the god that resides in this area. Means the Divine part that it resides in this area.
Rustom: Vastu-devata-bhyo namah.
Shri Mataji: The one – I don’t know if they do vastu here, but in every house in India they put a kind of a vastu, means they put certain things inside the foundation to protect the house.
Rustom: Mata pitrubhyam namah.
Shri Mataji: And your mother and father they are to be worshipped – they are to be saluted because you are part of them.
Rustom: Shri Lakshmi-Narayanabhyam namah.
Sarvebhyo devebhyo namoh namah. Sarvebhyo…
Shri Mataji: Lakshmi Narayan is, why… again see, Lakshmi Narayan. More insistence on Lakshmi Narayan, again, because of the Sushumna, again. The Void.
Sarva devobhyo Gurubhyo…
Rustom: Ah. Sarva gurubhyo namah.
Shri Mataji: All for your ascent, you see?
Rustom: Sarvebhyo-brahmanebhyo namah.
Shri Mataji: All those who are realized souls to be really saluted.
All has to do with the ascent, see?
Rustom: Now the twelve names of Lord Ganesha.
Shri Mataji: Now. The twelve names of Ganesha because Ganesha must be awakened within you to begin with first, you see, He must be first of all, and then open the source of Ganesha.
Rustom: Nirvighnamastu, Sumukhasch Ekdantascha, Kapilo Gajakarnakah, Lambodarascha, Vikato, Vignanasho Ganadhipah Dhumra-ketur-Ganadhyaksho, Bala-chandro Gajananah Dvadash-aitani Namani, yah patet shrunu-yad-api vidya-rambhe vivahe-cha, praveshe nirgame tata sangrame sankate-chaiva, vignas tasya na jayate.
Then all the mantras of the various Devas and Devis.
Shukl-ambara-dharam devam, shashi-varnam chatur-bhujam prasanna-vadanam dhyayet, sarva vignopa-shantaye.
Sarva-mangala mangalye, Shive sarva-arta sadhike sharanye tryambake Gauri, Narayani namostute.
Sarvada sarva karyeshu, nasti tesham amangalam yesham hridisto bhagavan, mangalayatanam harih.
Tadeva lagnam sudinam tadeva, tara-balam chandra-balam tadeva vidya balam daiva-balam tadeva, lakshmi-pateh tenghri yugam smarami.
Labhas-tesham jayastesham kutastesham parajayah…
Shri Mataji: Tesham. Labhas-tesham, to Them. Labhas-tesham.
Rustom: Yesham indivara shyame hridayaste janardanah.
Shri Mataji: All – all about Shri Krishna. All about Shri Vishnu.
Rustom: Vinayakam, Gurum bhanum, Brahma-Vishnu-Maheshwaram Saraswatim pranamyadau sarva karyarta siddhaye.
Abhipa-sitartha siddhyartham pujito yah surah suraih sarva-vighna haras tasmai Ganadhi pataye namah.
Shri Mataji: Oh, Shri Ganesha’s.
Rustom: Yes. (More mantras) Now we say where this puja is being – all, the time and…
Rustom: Srimad bhagavato mahapurushasya vishnurajnaya pravartamanasya, adya brahmano-dvitiya parardhe vishnupade, sri svetavaraha kalpe, vaivasvata manvantare – Krita Yuge – England varshe – Europe kande – Cheltenham deshe.
Shri Mataji: Ne – now why was what…
Rustom: Why was what – Manvantare, Mother.
Shri Mataji: Accha… [hindi].
Shri Mataji: Hm, Kruta Yuge… [hindi].
It’s Kruta Yuge, this is time when you have to do something. Something will actualize, something will work out. This is Kruta Yuga.
Rustom: Thames uttara tire, varshaa grishme, shraavana mase, shukla pakshe, navami thatau… (Mantras continue). [In the meantime Shri Mataji says: “Yes” to a child while teaching her to keep her hands open.] Mataji Nirmala Devi priityartam – Sarva devi deva…
Pujari and yogis: … Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Rustom: (continues with mantras).
Shri Mataji: Shoda Shopachaar. Shoda see, is sixteen.
Rustom: Yes. Shoda Shopachaar.
Shri Mataji: Hm. Yes. See, whatever I have got, my knowledge, whatever we have got, our knowledge, you see, and whatever things we have got, whatever we have got, means whatever we’ve got with us, we worship You, oh Mother. With our sixteen ways of worship we do to You.
[Pujari continues with mantras].
Rustom: Now we start Ganesha Puja.
Shri Mataji: All right. [Hindi]. [To the children] Please sit down comfortably, all right? All of you should sit nicely. [Hindi]
All right. Come along, all the children.
[Sanskrit mantras] Wakra tunda mahakaya suryakoti sammaprabha nirvighnam kuru me deva sarva karyeshu sarvada. [More mantras for Ganesha]
Shri Mataji: Wash My Feet.
Rustom: Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Shri Mahaganapatayé Namah Asanathe Akshatam Samarpayami.
Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namah Padyam Samarpayami.
Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namah Arghyam Samarpayami.
Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namah… [then inaudible because voices overlap]
Shri Mataji: …Too much. …You do it later, you and Kalpana – (She corrects Herself) Aradhna, alright? Just wait here. Just wash it, wash it. …
Rustom : Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namah Snanam Samarpayami. [More mantras to Shri Mahaganapati are recited]
Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namaha Yajnopavitam Samarpayami. [More mantras to Mahaganapati]
Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Mahaganapatayé Namah Alankarathe Akshatam Samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: …Aradhna [hindi]. Now let them do it, come along. Now… [hindi].
Rustom: This is Shri Ganesha Atharva Sheersham.
Shri Mataji: … That’s little [unclear]…
Pujari and yogis: Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
[Shri Mataji works on a child washing Her feet, then says “Better…(hindi)… she’ll be better”]. [Pujari aside: “Finished the Ganesha Puja”]
Shri Mataji: Now, Gavin?
Gavin: …finished with the Ganesha Puja.
Shri Mataji: Hm? (Hindi)
Rustom: Ganesha Puja…
Rustom: Finished the Ganesha Puja.
Shri Mataji: Kya? (Hindi meaning what?)
Rustom: Ganesha Puja is finished now.
Shri Mataji: Finished now [Hindi conversation. Rustom: “Take two mantras”… conversation in Hindi continues].
Rustom: Take this water?
Shri Mataji: Take it to wipe My feet.
This water can be – better to put it on the Sahasrara of everyone. Specially the children [Hindi].
[Pujari resumes mantras in Sanskrit]
Shri Mataji: Now let them do it. Aradhna? …
[Pujari speaks probably in Hindi or Sanskrit. Shri Mataji replies and then in English: “… or puja we will do. There’s nothing beyond, eh?”]
Rustom: It is the worship of the picture as a representation of the universe, which is present in front in the form of Shri Mataji. [Then mantras in Sanskrit follow]
Now the mantra of the earth, to stabilize our puja [long mantra to Pruthvi]. Now we are asking all the horrible things to go away, the bhuts and … [laughter].
[Mantras in Sanskrit follow].
Now we perform six things to purify our body, we touch six parts of our body.
Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Hridayaya Namah.
Shri Mataji: First is heart, is important. (Shri Mataji puts Her right hand on the heart)
Rustom: Next, the head (Shri Mataji puts Her right hand on Sahasrara). Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Shirsay Swaha. Next the back of your head, yes. (Shri Mataji puts Her right hand on the back of Her head) Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Shikayay Vashak.
Om – next to form a protection around us.
Shri Mataji: Vashak is like this, you see: Va (Shri Mataji makes a sort of bandhan around Her with Vishuddhi and Nabhi fingers of right hand, starting from left side, above Her head and down along right side), Shak (Shri Mataji hits Vishuddhi and Nabhi fingers of right hand on the left hand). Is a bandhan.
Rustom: So, Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Shikayay Vashak
[while the pujari (Rustom Bujorjee) recites, Shri Mataji makes again the bandhan-like gesture passing Her right hand along the left side, then behind Her head, then down along right side and ending up hitting Vishuddhi and Nabhi fingers of right hand on left hand. All yogis do the same]
Then kavacha, Mataji…
Shri Mataji: Kavach. Is a bandhan, yes.
Like this you can do it.
Rustom: Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Kavachaya Swah.
(Shri Mataji entangles the fingers of Her hands, rises them upwards along the centre of Her body, then brings them on the back of head, then brings them down and hits right hand on left hand. Yogis follow gestures with Her)
Rustom: Next the eyes, and the Agnya chakra.
Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Nitrayaya Vashak.
(Shri Mataji touches left then right eye)
Rustom: Next we put a bandhan.
Om Bhur Bhuva Swaha Astraya Phat. (Pujari aside: “…bandhan”)
Shri Mataji: Do like this. [She shows gesture: right hand rises along left side, then on top of head, then down right side and hits right hand on left hand]. Astra. Astra means the weapon.
[Pujari recites more Sanskrit mantras]
Rustom: Now we invoke all the rivers.
Gange cha yamune chaiva godavari sarasvati narmade sindhu kaveri jale’smin sannidhim kuru.
Now we salute the pitcher: kalashaya namah [Sanskrit invocation follows].
Now we worship the conch. [Sanskrit invocation follows]. Next the bell.
Shri Mataji: What is it?
Rustom: Gantha. [A bell is rung, while the mantras are recited] This signifies the arrival of all the Devas and the departure of all the rakshasas. Next prayer to the lamp.
[Mantras are recited]
Now the main puja, puja begins. [Sanskrit mantras – then prayer to Vishnu:]
Shaanta-Aakaaram Bhujaga-Shayanam Padma-Naabham Sura-Iisham Vishva-Aadhaaram Gagana-Sadrsham Megha-Varnna Shubha-Anggam Lakssmii-Kaantam Kamala-Nayanam Yogibhir-Dhyaana-Gamyam Vande Vissnnum Bhava-Bhaya-Haram Sarva-Loka-Eka-Naatham…
[Shri Mataji shows to the children to touch their Sahasrara, probably after washing the Feet]
Rustom: Now the mantras of the Goddess.
Namo Devyai Mahaa-Devyai Shivaayai Satatam Namah Namah Prakrtyai Bhadraayai Niyataah Prannataah Sma Taam (mantra continues).
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Avahanam Samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Now the Avahana. After awakening yourself, awakening all your channels, now the Avahana is the calling, now you are inviting your Mother. This is the nimantranam, this is the way you are inviting.
[Shri Mataji calls one child to wash Her Feet] [Hindi].
Rustom: (continues with mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Asanathe Akshatam Samarpayami.
(Continues with mantras)
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Padyam Samarpayami.
Padyam is the washing of the Feet of the Divine Mother. (Continues with mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Arghyam Samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Now it is very interesting, in Sanskrit language, when you are using the water to wash the Feet of the Goddess, then it’s called as Padyam. When you are giving water for Mother to drink, it’s Arghyam. The word changes, you see. Once it is for the Goddess, or for Gods, then the word is different. For other people it is just water – they call it nira, jalam, anything. But for the Goddess it is padyam. Arghyam. Asanam.
Shri Mataji: Udaka, Udaka also. Pouring the water – the water that is poured is called as Udak. (Shri Mataji laughs) No other language has this.
Shri Mataji: No language – only except in English I think they call God “Thou”, perhaps, maybe.
Rustom: That is the limit.
Rustom: That is the limit.
Shri Mataji: That’s the limit (laughter).
“No more! For God if we call Thou You should be satisfied!”. (Laughter)
[Pujari continues with mantras. Then: Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Acchamanayam Samarpayami.]
Shri Mataji: Acchamanayam: whatever used, for…
Shri Mataji: Sipping, you see. Acchaman is sipping. Of the Mother, is called as Acchamani.
[Pujari recites names of Indian rivers in Sanskrit]
Shri Mataji: All these rivers I bring to Your Feet to give You bath.
Rustom: Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai namoh namaha Snamayam Samarpayami.
Gavin: See, we are near the sources of two great rivers of this country here.
Shri Mataji: What is that?
Gavin: The Thames and Severn both start very close to here.
Shri Mataji: Here? It’s Thames and…?
Yogi: Severn doesn’t start here.
Gavin, No, but there’s a tributary for it just… Yes.
Shri Mataji: Is it? Thames starts from here?
Yogi: But the most (?) famous of all the springs that come out of the earth is Cheltenham, Mother.
Yogis: Spa. (Laughter)
Shri Mataji: Spa: ah!
Rustom: Now we offer ghee to Shri Mataji.
Should we take another for You?
Shri Mataji: Ghee is to be offered.
You see, if you want to use the Feet water this time then do it, it’s good, all right, start. Better do it, it’s good.
Rustom: (recites Sanskrit mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Ghruta snanam samarpayami. Shuddhodaka snanam samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Shuddhodaka, now water has to be poured out.
Rustom: Pure – not just – pure water.
Shri Mataji: But Shuddhodaka – is all right, pure water. Shuddhodaka – not even water it is, it is the water that is to be pured – poured, is Shuddhodaka; and Shuddha is the pure.
Rustom: (Mantras). Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah paya snanam samarpayami. Shuddhodaka snanam samarpayami.
Next we offer curd to Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji: Little hot – more hot water.
Rustom: (Mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah dadhi snanam samarpayami. Shuddhodaka snanam samarpayami.
Next, honey. Now we offer honey to Shri Mataji.
(Mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah madhu snanam samarpayami. Shuddhodaka snanam samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Milk has to be more. More milk. It’s all right, you can pour more milk now.
In out of proportion it is. Let’s keep heated milk, it is better, it doesn’t matter. It should all go away when you put the sugar.
Rustom: Next we offer sugar to Shri Mataji. Has been pured from the sugarcane.
(Sanskrit mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah sharkara snanam samarpayami. Shuddhodaka snanam samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Now rub it on My Feet (the sugar – ed.). Would be better. Then the fingers you see, just – it’s still there, quite a lot. The chakras are.
(Somebody aside: “Shiny!”)
Rustom: Next we offer to Shri Mataji three auspicious things mixed in water: camphor, sandalwood paste and perfume.
(Sanskrit mantras follow)
Shri Mataji: Now on the Feet. Just pour it. Now pour the water. Too much. Yes, there. (Indistinct).
Rustom: Now we are supposed to offer Shri Mataji sindhur, tulasi leaves and turmeric powder.
Shri Mataji: Tulsi, tulsi leaves, first. That’s all, then I’ll remove My Feet. Offer tulsi leaves. Have you got tulasi here?
Basil. You’ll get it later. All right?
Good. (Sanskrit mantras for offering of tulsi)
Now just wipe My Feet, take this out and I’ll put them on the ground, now you can put…
Rustom: (Sanskrit mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah bhupam samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: Now spread something here down below, put here something else, dry this. Yes. Just the sindhur and this thing, these things you put on My Feet. And must – you must put keshar, keshar you haven’t got. I should have brought keshar. Let’s try, saffron.
Rustom: Because here in this country we can get it.
Shri Mataji: Saffron you get quite a lot.
Rustom: It’s quite easy.
Shri Mataji: Very easy. Saffron is very good. Now.
Rustom: We should take some photographs.
Rustom: We should take some photographs.
Shri Mataji: Yes. Before… even Sahaja yogis…
Rustom: Mataji Shri Nirmala…
Shri Mataji: First put the dried one, have you got the dried? Just akshata, mix it up in that, it’s all right. Just this, you see.
Little bit, yes. That’s all. Now what else?
Rustom: Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Bhupam Samarpayami (offer of incense). Deepam darshayami. (Mantras continue)
Shri Mataji: Now just put that one, yes. Do like this, Gavin. (Gavin takes some incense and performs Aarti to Shri Mataji’s Feet). Yes. All right.
Rustom: Now to the five forms of Pranayami.
Shri Mataji (to Gavin): Now the karpura (camphor) little bit. Rub it up.
Now the offering whatever I have to eat – something you have…(indistinct words) sweet or chana will do. Chana, chana is absolutely best, I love chana.
This is Naivedhyam, you see, just (indistinct). Only the Brahmins eat everything (laughter), the Gods don’t eat anything.
Rustom: Om Shri Pranaya swaha.
Shri Mataji: Chana (Shri Mataji vibrates the food).
Rustom: Om Shri Apanaya Swaha. Om Shri Bhyanaya Swaha. Om Shri Uddhanaya swaha. Om Shri Samanaya swaha. Om Shri Brahmané swaha.
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah.
Shri Mataji: Use this thing. Just use this. This one.
Warren: Should use this.
Rustom: (Mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Mantra Pushpam Samarpayami. Namaskaranami (mantras follow).
Now we come to the main puja.
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Abhisheka Snanam Samarpayami.
Shri Mataji: I know. (Pujari starts recitation of mantras) This is actually when You are in a statue (laughter). You can only do all this when You are in a statue. (Laughter)
Rustom: (Mantra) Now we can – sari, Mataji, vastraya.
Shri Mataji: Vastra. [Pujari aside to somebody: “You got some sari?”] Sari…(hindi). What sari? What’s that? No, no, no. Sari’s out of question.
Rustom: Which vastran, then?
Shri Mataji: Which one they opened within now – anything. No, now – any vastran you can use that – do…
Yogis: “We could try”
(Shri Mataji says to a baby girl talking) Olympia…
(Shri Mataji makes the gesture not to talk) Good.
Rustom: (Recitation of mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Vastran Samarpayami.
Om – Sandal. (Mantras for offering of sandal) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah chandanam samarpayami.
Then some more akshata, Mataji. (Mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah Akshatam samarpayami.
Now. (More mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah haridram samarpayami.
(Mantras) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah kumkumam samarpayami. (Shri Mataji makes bindi to Herself)
Rustom: (Mantra) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah kajalam samarpayami. (Offer of kajal)
(Mantra) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah kantha sutram samarpayami. (Offer of sutra for the neck) [Shri Mataji speaks in Hindi]
(Mantra) Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namoh Namah kankanam samarpayami. (Offer of bangles) (More mantras follow. Shri Mataji speaks in Hindi)
Rustom: Shall we do the Sahasranama (…) – Lalita Sahasranama?
Shri Mataji: [Hindi conversation with pujari. “Puja… Havan… Havana… Devi Mahatmya…”. Rustom: “Devi Mahatmyam”]
No, the – when Mahishasura was killed, you see, this one was read. So the beginning of it – and then say it, read it in English, would be better. [Pujari starts reading in Sanskrit] If you read it in English (Shri Mataji laughs) would be better.
Rustom: Read it in English.
Shri Mataji: Hm, then whatever is in English is the story. It’s better that they understand. (Hindi) All right, stand up and read it.
Rustom: This is the great hymn to the Goddess when She had killed Mahishasura, whom as we all know is back again in Bangalore.
“To that Ambika who is worthy of worship by all the devas and sages, and who pervades this world by Her power, and who is the embodiment of the entire power of all the hosts of Devas, we bow in devotion.
May She grant us auspicious things.
May Chandika whose incomparable greatness and power, Bhagavan Vishnu, Brahma and Hara are unable to describe, bestow Her mind on protecting the entire world, and on destroying the fear of evil.
Oh Devi, we bow before You. Who are Yourself good fortune in the dwellings of the virtuous, and ill-fortune in those of the vicious, intelligence in the hearts of the learned, faith in the hearts of the good, and modesty in the hearts of the high-born. May You protect the Universe!
Oh Devi, how can we describe Your inconceivable form, or Your abundant, surpassing valour that destroys the Asuras, or Your wonderful feats displayed in battles amongst all the hosts of Gods, asuras and others?
You are the origin of all the three worlds, though You are possessed of the three gunas, You are not known to have any of their attendant qualities. You are incomprehensible even to Vishnu, Shiva and others. You are the resort of all. The entire world is composed of an infinitesimal portion of Yourself. You are verily the Supreme Primordial Prakruti. Untransformed.
Oh Devi, You are swaha, at whose utterance the whole assemblage of Gods obtain satisfaction in all the sacrifices. You are the swadha…”
Shri Mataji: Same. Now, these are the mantras of the swaha: Bhuh is pruthvi, is Ganesha Tattwa. Then you said swah.
Rustom: Yes. Om Bhuh Bhuvah Swah.
Shri Mataji: Swah is the satisfaction.
Bhuvah is the Antariksha, the whole universe.
Rustom: You are the swadha which gives satisfaction to the manes…
Shri Mataji: Swa-dha: swa is your self, dha means you have sustained yourself with your self. Swadha is the quality of the Nabhi chakra.
Rustom: “Therefore you are chanted by people. Oh Devi, You are Bhagavati, the Supreme Vidya, which is the cause of liberation and great inconceivable penances.
You are the Supreme Knowledge, are cultivated by sages who desire liberation, whose senses are well restrained and who are devoted to reality and have shed all the blemishes. (Shri Mataji indicates with Her finger to pay particular attention to this).
You are the soul of Shabda-Brahma, You are the repository of the very pure…”
Shri Mataji: Logos, logos you call? – Shabda-Brahma. OM. “You are the Soul of that”.
Rustom: OM. All the Vedas come out of it (unclear).
Shri Mataji: Everything is created out of that OM. Shabda-Brahma is OM, and out of that all this Brahma – means Brahmanda – is created, out of OM.
Rustom: Shabda-Brahma.
Shri Mataji: All the scriptures.
Rustom: “You are the repository of the very pure Rik and Yajus hymns and of the Sama hymns, the recital of those words is beautiful with the Udgitha. You are Bhagavati, embodying the three Vedas. And You are the sustenance whereby life is maintained.
You are the Supreme Destroyer of the pain of all the worlds. Oh Devi, You are the intellect, by which the essence of all scriptures is comprehended. You are Durga, the boat that takes men across the difficult ocean of worldly existence, devoid of attachments. You are Shri who has invariably taken Her abode in the heart of Vishnu.
You are indeed Gauri who has established Herself with Shiva. Gently smiling, pure, resembling the full moon’s orb, beautiful like the splendor of excellent gold was Your face. Yet it was very strange that, being swayed by anger, Mahishasura could not bear it.
Far strange it is that after seeing Your wrathful face, O Devi, terrible with its frowns and red in hue like the rising moon, that Mahishasura did not immediately give up his life! For, who can live after beholding the enraged Destroyer?
O Devi, be propitious. You are Supreme. If enraged, you forthwith destroy the (asura) families for the welfare of the world. This was known the very moment the extensive forces of Mahishasura were brought to their end.
You are always bounteous, to those fortunate ones with whom You are well pleased, are indeed the object of esteem in the country, theirs are riches, theirs are glories, and their acts of righteousness perish not; they are indeed blessed and possessed of devoted children, servants and wives.
By Your Grace, O Devi, the blessed individual does daily all righteous deeds with utmost care and thereby attains to heaven. Are You not, therefore, O Devi, the bestower of reward in all the three worlds?
When called to mind in a difficult position, You remove fear from every person. When called to mind by those in happiness, You bestow a mind still more pious. Which Goddess but You, O Dispeller of poverty, pain and fear, has an ever sympathetic heart for helping everybody?
The world attains happiness by the killing of these foes; and though these asuras have committed sins enough to keep them long in hell, let them reach heaven by meeting death eventually at battle with You. Thinking thus, it is that You, O Devi, certainly destroy our enemies.
Don’t You reduce to ashes all asuras by mere sight? But You direct Your weapons against them so that even the wicked ones, purified by the missiles, may attain higher worlds”.
Shri Mataji: Yes. (She points Her index finger to draw the attention on this point)
Rustom: “Such is Your most kindly intention towards them”.
Shri Mataji: This one you read again.
Rustom: “Don’t You reduce to ashes all asuras by mere sight? But You direct Your weapons against them so that even the wicked ones, purified by the missiles, may attain the higher worlds”.
Shri Mataji: May attain. May.
Rustom: May. (Laughter) “That is Your most kindly intention towards them.”
Shri Mataji: Not promised. (Laughter)
Rustom: “If the eyes of the asuras had not been blinded by the terrible flashes of the mass of light issuing from Your sword or by the copious luster of Your spear point, it is because they saw also Your face resembling the moon, giving out cool rays.
O Devi, Your nature is to subdue the conduct of the wicked; this is Your peerless beauty inconceivable by others; Your power destroys those who have robbed the Devas of their prowess, and You have thus manifested Your compassion even towards the enemies.
What is Your prowess to be compared to? Where can one find this beauty (of Yours) most charming, yet striking fear in enemies?
Compassion in heart and relentlessness in battle are seen, O Devi, O Bestower of boons, only in You in all the three worlds!
Through the destruction of the enemies all the three worlds have been saved by You. Having killed them in the battlefront, You have led even those hosts of enemies upwards, and You have dispelled our fear of the frenzied enemies of the Devas. Salutations to You.
Oh Devi, protect us with Your spear. O Ambika, protect us with Your sword, protect us by the sound of Your bell and by the sound of Your bow-string.
O Chandika, guard us in the east, in the west, in the north and in the south by the waving of Your spear, O Ishwari!
Protect us and the earth with those lovely forms of Yours, moving about in the three worlds, as also with Your terrible forms.
O Ambika, protect us on every side with Your sword, spear and club and whatever other weapons Your soft hand has touched. Amen.
Rustom and the yogis: Sakshat Shri Adishakti Bhagavati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Shri Mataji: Very well. All right. Just vibrations are too much. (Hindi) Havan? Eh?
Shri Mataji: Aarti. [Hindi conversation with Rustom, the pujari]
Rustom: Let us sing the Aarti to Shri Mataji now.
Shri Mataji: Don’t play those… which one were you playing yesterday? Which bell were you playing yesterday? Yesterday which one was played?
Warren: Which one did you use yesterday? It was bad sound.
Yogi: These small brasses.
Shri Mataji: These? You know, something else was there.
Yogi: Somebody had some different…
Shri Mataji: Hm? What’s that? These you used yesterday? These are all right. Yesterday something else was here.
Yogi: They’re metal, Mother, they’re not brass.
Warren: They are metal, they are metal, they are not brass.
Shri Mataji: Let Me see. These are from where? Ah, this is good. These are from India?
Gavin: Some present from India, yes. They were given to the sahaja yogis in Bombay, I think.
Shri Mataji: Who gave?
Gavin: Somebody in India, I don’t know…
Shri Mataji: No, it’s not correct, this is not all right. That’s all right, that’s all right. And this you need not play. Only that will do.
For that you have a very big one, which goes with the complete, you see, because the movement – next time they are going to present you with that bell, big bell, and the antah gharial (?)
(In a very low voice. Sounds like:) Such vibrations, I tell you.
[Conch is played, and Aarti is sung by yogis. Shri Mataji sits with left hand open upwards and right hand raised in blessing]
Yogi: Sarva Devi Deva Maha Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki!
Om twameva sakshat Shri Mahalakshmi Mahasaraswati Mahakali Trigunatmika Kundalini sakshat Shri Adishakti sakshat Shri Bhagavati sakshat Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Om twameva sakshat Shri Kalki sakshat Shri Adishakti sakshat Shri Bhagavati sakshat Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Om twameva sakshat Shri Kalki sakshat Shri Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha. Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha. Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha. Shri Nirmala Devi namoh namaha.
Rustom: Bolo Shri Parameshwari Mata Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki!
Yogi: Bolo Shri Mahadevi Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki!
Yogi 2: Bolo Mahashakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ki!
Shri Mataji: Today I bless you specially that you’ll meet all My bhaktas, and Sahaja Yoga will grow very fast, all over the world.
I also bless you, those people who will try to attack you, will become sahaja yogis.
The highest of all, I bless you with the power of cleansing yourself, and cleansing others with your love, with your devotion, with your dedication.
May Adishakti bless you then.
Gavin: Mataji Nirmala Devi ki!
Shri Mataji: May God bless you.
Gavin: Mother, whatever mistakes we’ve made…
Shri Mataji: How much time do we have for the lunch? What time did you have lunch?
Yogi: Yesterday it was about quarter to one, Mother.
Shri Mataji: Will they do it at one o’clock, if you tell them? So we can finish?
Yogi: It’s normally one o’clock. one o’ clock.
Shri Mataji: See? Please ask them to keep it one. All right. Or one fifteen, one fifteen would be better. Or one o’ clock. All right.
Yogi: Mother, he told me quarter to one…
Yogi: …before the puja.
Shri Mataji: What’s it?
Yogi: The warden told me quarter to one for the lunch.
Warren: Quarter to one. The warden told him a quarter to one, before starting the puja.
Shri Mataji: Just request him …
Warren: We could change.
Yogi: Let’s just change it, just change it to one o’clock.
Yogi 2: One o’ clock, yes.
Shri Mataji: You see, you say that I went and told they – because it is one o’clock always, so better to have it at one. Let’s go down. There should be no objection because, for having earlier, you know, people.
Shri Mataji: (Hindi) Is there any arrangement already?
Yogi: No. For havan? (Inaudible)
Shri Mataji: (Shri Mataji takes a small instrument which is played by hitting together the two metallic parts) You know, we don’t actually – in India you don’t get (indistinct). What is this? Is rather particular one.
Yogi: I think it’s a metal alloy.
Yogi: I think it’s a metal alloy… metal alloy – mixture of metals.
Shri Mataji: Ah, metal… (indistinct words, sentence ends with ‘maryada’ or ‘maryadas’).